Canine  Nutrition
REVISED
Choosing the Best Food . . .
. . . for Your Breed
William D. Cusick
Meeting the Nutritional Needs
of
YOUR Breed of Dog
Copyright 1997
All rights reserved.  No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronically or mechanically,
including photocopying, recording or by any information storage or
retrieval system without prior written permission of the publisher.
Forward
This book is a comprehensive study of specialized nutritional needs that
vary from breed to breed.
This book will show dog owners why dogs taken out of their natural
habitat and fed a diet containing food sources unsuitable for their
specific systems will develop nutritional allergies.  It gives the dog
owner a simple solution to this common problem, which can be
manifested by body rashes, pigmentation changes, or coat loss.  This
information also explains why the nutrient source for a commercial all-
breed dog food satisfactory for one breed may cause nutritional problems
for a different breed of dog.
With Special Thanks
TO SANDY
Without you this book would not have been finished
Also
To the many dog breeders who spent their time sharing
their knowledge and in some cases risking the health of their dogs
Warning - Disclaimer
This book is designed to provide information in regard to the subject
matter covered.  It is sold with the understanding that the publisher and
author are not engaged in rendering veterinary, medical or other
professional services.  If veterinary or other expert assistance is required,
the services of a competent professional should be sought.
It is not the purpose of this manual to reprint all the information that is
otherwise available to the author and/or publisher, but to complement,
amplify and supplement other text.  You are urged to read all the
available material, learn as much as possible about canine nutrition and
to tailor the information to your individual needs.
Every effort has been made to make this manual as complete and as
accurate as possible.  However, there may be mistakes both
typographical and in content.  Therefore, this text should be used only
as a general guide and not as the ultimate source of information on
canine nutrition.  Furthermore, this manual contains information on
canine nutrition only up to the printing date.
The purpose of this manual is to educate and entertain.  The author and
publisher shall have neither liability nor responsibility to any person or
entity with respect to any loss or damage caused, or alleged to be caused,
directly or indirectly by the information contained in this book.
If you do not wish to be bound by the above, you may return this
book to the publisher for a full refund.
CONTENTS
I.
How The Different Breeds Developed Different Nutritional Needs  1
II.
Breed Specific U.S. Government Research
 5
III.
Nutritional Teamwork
 9
IV.
Protein and Its Amino Acids
15
V.
Fat Carbohydrates and Fatty Acids
19
VI.
Individual Functions of Vitamins & Minerals
23
VII.
Supplementing
25
VIII. Nutrients Beneficial to Humans . . . BUT . . . Harmful to Dogs
29
IX.
Trusting Labels
33
X..
Label Wording Definitions
37
XI.
Life Cycle Changes that Change Nutritional Requirements
41
XII.. A Home Health Check for Symptoms of Nutritional Problems
45
XIII. A Product Formulated for The Nutritionally Average Dog
47
XIV. The Home Cooking Alterative
49
XV.   Breed  by  Breed
Affenpinscher
57
Afghan Hound
58
Airedale Terrier
59
Akita
60
Alaskan Malamute
61
American Cocker Spaniel
62
American Eskimo
63
American Foxhound
64
American Staffordshire Terrier
65
American Pit Bull Terrier
65
American Water Spaniel
66
Anatolian Shepherd
67
Australian Cattle Dog
68
Australian Terrier
69
Basenji
70
Basset Hound
71
Beagle
72
Bearded Collie
73
Bedlington Terrier
74
Belgian Malinois
75
Belgian Sheepdog
76
Belgian Tervuren
77
Bernese Mountain Dog
78
Bichon Frise
79
Black and Tan Coonhound
80
Bloodhound
81
Border Collie
82
Border Terrier
83
Borzoi
84
Boston Terrier
85
Bouvier des Flandres
86
Boxer
87
Briard
88
Brittany Spaniel
89
Brussels Griffon
90
Bull Terrier
91
Bulldog
92
Bullmastiff
93
Cairn Terrier
94
Cardigan Welsh Corgi
95
Chesapeake Bay Retriever
96
Chihuahua
97
Chinese Crested Dog
98
Chinese Shar-Pei
99
Chow Chow
100
Clumber Spaniel
101
Collie
102
Coton De Tulear
103
Curly-coated Retriever
104
Dachshund
105
Dalmatian
106
Dandie Dinmont Terrier
107
Doberman Pinscher
108
English Cocker Spaniel
109
English Foxhound
110
English Setter
111
English Springer Spaniel
112
English Toy Spaniel
113
  Page
      Page
Page
Breed by Breed
(Continued)
 Page
 Page
Field Spaniel
114
Fila Brasileiro
115
Flat-coated Retriever
116
Fox Terrier
117
French Bulldog
118
German Shepherd Dog
119
German Shorthaired Pointer
120
German Wirehaired Pointer
121
Giant Schnauzer
122
Glen of Imaal Terrier
123
Golden Retriever
124
Gordon Setter
125
Great Dane
126
Great Pyrenees
127
Greater Swiss Mountain Dog
128
Greyhound
129
Harrier
130
Ibizan Hound
131
Irish Setter
132
Irish Terrier
133
Irish Water Spaniel
134
Irish Wolfhound
135
Italian Greyhound
136
Japanese Chin
137
Keeshond
138
Kerry Blue Terrier
139
Komondor
140
Kuvasz
141
Labrador Retriever
142
Lakeland Terrier
143
Lhasa Apso
144
Maltese
145
Manchester Terrier
146
Mastiff (English/Neapolitan) 147
Miniature Pinscher
148
Miniature Schnauzer
149
Newfoundland
150
Norfolk Terrier
151
Norwegian Elkhound
152
Norwich Terrier
153
Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever
154
Old English Sheepdog
155
Otter Hound
156
Papillon
157
Pekingese
158
Pembroke Welsh Corgi
159
Pharaoh Hound
160
Pointer
161
Pomeranian
162
Poodle (Miniature)
163
Poodle (Standard)
164
Poodle (Toy)
165
Portuguese Water Dog
166
Pug
167
Puli
168
Rhodesian Ridgeback
169
Rottweiler
170
Saint Bernard
171
Saluki
172
Samoyed
173
Schipperke
174
Scottish Deerhound
175
Scottish Terrier
176
Sealyham Terrier
177
Shetland Sheepdog
178
Shiba Inu
179
Shih Tzu
180
Siberian Husky
181
Silky Terrier
182
Skye Terrier
183
Sloughi
184
Soft-Coated Wheaten Terrier 185
Staffordshire Bull Terrier
186
Standard Schnauzer
187
Sussex Spaniel
188
Swedish Vallhund
189
Tibetan Mastiff
190
Tibetan Spaniel
191
Tibetan Terrier
192
Vizsla
193
Weimaraner
194
Welsh Springer Spaniel
195
Welsh Terrier
196
West Highland White Terrier 197
Whippet
198
Wirehaired Pointing Griffon 199
Xoloitzcuintli (standard)(toy)
200
Yorkshire Terrier
201
BASIC NUTRITION
HOW DIFFERENT BREEDS
DEVELOPED DIFFERENT
NUTRITIONAL NEEDS
It is truly fascinating to see a 235-pound Irish Wolfhound standing
beside a 5-pound Pekingese, an Alaskan Malamute, and a Dachshund.
When different breeds are standing side by side, it is sometimes hard to
comprehend that they all belong to one single species of animal.  There
are over 250 different breeds within that one single species called
canine.  Each breed is unique; each differs in its appearance, its
temperament, and its nutritional needs.  How did these many breeds
become so differentiated?
To understand the development of the variations found in modern day
dogs, we must go back before the time man first became involved with
these animals, just a short 10,000 years ago.  The actual evolution of
modern day dogs began over 40 million years ago!  It is by going back
and researching dogs' evolution over these last 40 million years that we
gain insight into how the modern breeds of today became so differentiated.
None of us questions the difference in coats between an arctic breed and
a breed from the desert.  Most of us also accept the theory of how
different breeds developed different coats to survive within a specific
environment.  In the arctic the extremely low temperatures created a
requirement for a thick double coat to protect the dog in its cold climate.
In the desert the hot arid temperatures created a requirement for a lighter
single coat.  Thus, the dog's survival in these different climates dictated
the development of a suitable coat.
We also should not be surprised to find different nutritional requirements
among breeds from different environments.  Like the way an
environment's climate effected the development of a dog's coat, that
same environment effected the development of a dog's nutritional
requirements.  The native nutrients found in Nordic tundra and ice are
different from the nutrients found in the sand of the desert.  Therefore,
as each type of dog developed within a specific environment, its survival
also depended upon the dog's ability to process that environment's food.
Thus exposure to different environments produced breeds of dogs with
as many variations in nutritional requirements as they have variations in
appearance.
1
When comparing two breeds, often the differences can be more easily
identified if each breed has remained within a specific type of environment
for a prolonged time.  For example, comparing exterior differences
between any one of the Nordic breeds and the Pharaoh Hound is
obvious.  The Nordic breeds all developed in cold climates.  The
Pharaoh Hound developed in the arid regions south of the Mediterranean
and was even isolated on a single Mediterranean island for thousands of
years.  Since we know of this isolation we also can identify the Pharaoh
Hound's specific developmental native nutrients.  Knowing both the
Pharaoh Hound's present nutritional requirements and their native
island's specific nutrients, we can see the association between these two
known facts.  We also can show how this isolation, by limiting the breed
to specific nutrients, produced very pronounced breed specific nutritional
requirements.
With breeds that are new genetic hybrids, it is also possible to identify
the environments and the native nutrients that played a role in the
creation of their nutritional requirements.  However, to accomplish this
we must be able to trace their family tree.  An example of this would be
our tracing the development of the Sealyham Terrier, which was created
by Captain John Edwards in the late 1800's.  Since Captain Edwards kept
very accurate records of his breeding efforts in the development of the
Sealyham Terrier, the process of tracing its family tree is easy.  With
other genetic hybrids this process can be much more difficult, and with
some breeds all that can be done is offer an educated guess.
When considering the history of nutritional development for the members
of the dog family, another lesson we can learn from close inspection of
each breed is; be careful not to assume that all dogs from a specific
country, as we know it today, have the same nutritional heritage.  A dog
from China could be from the Mandarin, Hunan, or Szechuan province.
A dog from a smaller country, such as Germany, could have come from
a mountain environment, middle elevation plateaus, or a lowland area
next to the Baltic Sea.  A dog from Italy could have come from the
Sicilian or the Castilian Province.  Within each country there may be
different environments.  These in turn have their own unique foods.
Thus, breeds developing in the different environments of a single
country would have developed different nutritional requirements.
Also, to believe that all desert breeds or all mountain breeds have the
same nutritional needs is wrong.  We would have to be more specific:
Are the nutrients found in a high desert  or a low desert  environment?
2
Or if you are referring to the Alps of Germany, Switzerland or France
as The Mountains, consider this:  The tallest mountain in the French
Alps is Mont. Blanc reaching 15,771 feet above sea level.  The top of this
mountain is lower than the average elevations (16,000 feet above sea
level) for the Plateau Area of Tibet.  The mountains of Tibet go up from
this country's  "lower" plateau's to an elevation of over 29,000 feet high.
The nutrients found on the mountains of Tibet are very different from the
nutrients found on Mont. Blanc.   Therefore, when considering the
environment where a specific breed of dog developed, we must look
beyond the geographic label of mountain, plateau  or desert  to identify
the nutrients from that specific breed's area of origin.
Now let us consider the length of time that it would take to make a
genetic change, due to an environmental change for any of today's
breeds of dog.  Man has written about specific breeds of dog for the last
8000 years, but not one word can be found showing that a single breed
of dog has changed its genetic make-up due to a change in its environment
in all this time.  On the other hand many written accounts of breeds show
they remain the same, even after prolonged exposure to a new and
different environment.  One example of non-change after prolonged
exposure to a new environment is in the written records of the Whippet.
These records indicate the Whippet, which was transported from a hot
and dry homeland to England's cold and damp climate in 49 A.D., was
very much the same then as today's Whippet.  This breed has retained
a short sleek coat developed for a hot and dry climate, even after 2,100
years of being bred true in a cold and damp climate.  Thus, the Whippet
by retaining its short sleek coat, is evidence to us that the length of time
it can take to make an evolutionary change due to environmental effect
can be over 2,100 years.
The length of time needed to make a nutritional requirement change due
to exposure to a new environment's food supply also can take thousands
of years.  This is why today's Alaskan Malamute (a Nordic breed) still
thrives on fish, the German Shepherd Dog (a low plains farmland breed)
still thrives on beef and grain, and the Greyhound (a desert breed) still
thrives on rabbit.  These breeds, like all the different breeds removed
from their native environment and exposed to a single food supply (i.e..
one processed dog food formula), cannot have their nutritional needs
satisfactorily fulfilled.  Each breed has retained the genetic differences
that it developed in its distinctly different native environments and
for this reason, each should be treated NUTRITIONALLY as the
individual that it is.
3
Each breed of dog has
physical or temeramental characteristics
that are different from any other breed.
The question is
NOT IF those characteristics affect
a breed's nutritional requirements
BUT HOW MUCH do they affect a
breed's nutritional requirements?
WE SHOULD KNOW:
A breed that sheds
would need different amounts
of coat producing nutrients
than a breed that does not shed.
4
BREED SPECIFIC U. S.
GOVERNMENT RESEARCH
In the early 1970's the government’s National Research Council formed
a subcommittee to study the nutritional requirements of dogs. The
President at that time was L. B. Johnson. It was at his specific request
that this subcommittee was formed and research documentation compiled.
Also noteworthy is the fact that the President and his wife Ladybird
Johnson owned and raised Beagles. That is why most of the research for
the first report by this newly formed subcommittee was related to
nutritional requirements of the Beagle. The subcommittee published
their report Minimum Nutrient Requirements of Dogs for Growth and
Maintenance in 1974. Later in 1980 and again in 1985 their expanded
revisions showed tests on more nutrients and used different breeds. In
the 1985 revision many multi-breed research studies cited led the
committee to state “requirement of the dog can also vary depending on
the methods and criteria used in their derivation.” Or lay terms,
different breeds of dogs can have different nutrition requirements due
to where and how a specific breed developed.
In the National Research Council's 1985 report there are many hundred
of research studies cited from schools of veterinary medicine, dog food
companies, and independent laboratories. Each of these studies pertain
to a single nutrient, i.e. vitamin A, calcium, copper, etc. With each
research study, when two or more breeds were used, it also showed their
nutritional differences. Very noteworthy is the fact that in the entire
1985 report not one research study cited showed two breeds to have
the same nutritional requirements for any one nutrient.
Samples of specific research confirming breed specific nutritional
differences are found throughout the NRC's 1985 revised Nutrient
Requirements of Dogs:
Specific test that show different breeds of dogs all have different
nutritional needs can be seen in tests cited on the following pages: Page
3: “These data illustrate the marked effect on energy requirements
5
imposed by the environment and the additional influence of differences
in breed and behavior.” Page 9: Estimates of the protein requirement
of the dog can also vary depending on the methods and criteria used
in their derivation. Page 11: Blazaet al. (1982) studied the sulfur
amino acid requirements of growing Labrador and Beagle dogs in
three experiments... These studies indicated that the dogs breed may
influence methionine requirements. since Labradors but not Beagles
responded to increasing the methionine content from O.36 to 0.71
percent by increased weight gains and food intakes. Page 16: In the
section on Calcium... Dogs of some types and breeds may perform
satisfactorily on lower intakes of these minerals.’... ‘It is recognized
that there are many breeds of dogs, that they are maintained under a
wide range of environments, and are being... Page 19: Tinedt et al.
(1979) reported a copper toxicosis in Bedlington Terriers fed
commercial dog diets containing 5 to 10 mg. copper per kilogram of
diet. Ludwig et al. (1980) studied this disease in considerable detail
and concluded that it is unique to this breed of dog and is caused by
a genetic abnormality. ... The copper requirements for the majority of
dog breeds appears to be quite low.’ Page 20: Sanecki et al. (1982) fed
English Pointer pups a corn-soy based zinc deficient diet and reported
observing within 5 weeks lesions of... These lesions were reversible
by adding 200 mg. zinc carbonate per kilogram to the diet, with
complete remission of the external lesions in 6 weeks’.... ‘Fisher
(1977) fed more than 800 Beagles 32 mg./kg zinc of diet (calcium
concentration not noted) and did not report any clinical signs of zinc
deficiency. Page 24: Kozelka et a]. (1933) found that Collie puppies
were protected from rickets by a ratio 1.3 IU vitamin D (irradiated
ergosterol) per kilogram of body weight per day. Amoldand Elvehiem
(1939) found calcification to be normal in a growing Airedale puppy
receiving a 1.39 percent calcium and a 1.05 percent phosphorus (Ca/
P= 1.32:1) diet and l32 lU or less of vitamin D per kilogram of body
weight per day showed that growth and bone mineralization were
normal.’ ... “Fleischnrnnn Laboratories (1944) reported that 28 IU
vitamin D per kilogram of body weight daily was sufficient for Fox
Terriers when using a dietary calcium:phosphorus ratio of 2.1:1.
However, even with 270 IU per kilogram of body weight per day,
Collies and Great Danes showed X-ray evidence of rickets.”
6
Every few years the Board Members of the National Research
Council compiled the research data. They then reviewed all the
specific tests. After this review, they recommended the minimum
amounts of each nutrient for commercial dog food within the United
States. The recommended nutrient amounts are the quantities
determined by the committee to sustain life at a safe level and balance
for any or all breeds of dog. These recommended amounts are called
the “Minimum Nutrient Requirements of Dogs for Growth and
Maintenance (amounts per Kilogram of body weight per day)’ or
‘Required Minimum Concentrations of Available Nutrients in Dog
Food Formulated for Growth.
7
Each breed of dog has
physical or temeramental characteristics
that are different from any other breed.
The question is
NOT IF those characteristics affect
a breed's nutritional requirements
BUT HOW MUCH do they affect a
breed's nutritional requirements?
WE SHOULD KNOW:
A dog with a coat weighing 10% of its overall weight
will need more of the nutrients
that grow and maintain coat hair
than a dog with a coat weighing 5% of its overall weight.
8
NUTRITIONAL TEAMWORK
When inspecting each essential nutrient in a dog's diet, it is very
important to look at the other nutrients they affect or that affect them.
The nutrients that work together are the NUTRITIONAL TEAMS.  We
all recognize the teamwork between water and solid foods in the dog's
diet.  If either one is not present, we know the result will be death due
to a lack of an essential part of the dog's diet.  On the other hand, if we
present any one part of the team in quantities that are too far out of
proportion to the other parts, we can have the same disastrous results.
Balancing all the parts of a nutritional team is the most important
factor for formulating a proper diet for any dog.  The complete
nutritional team for canine nutrition consists of solids and liquids.
These can be broken down to include: protein, vitamins, minerals, trace
minerals, enzymes, fiber, fatty acids, carbohydrates, bacteria, and
water.  Then each part of the complete nutritional team can be broken
down into a team of its own.
The protein team:
Protein consists of building blocks called amino acids.  It is the
balance of ten specific amino acids that give dietary protein its bio-
nutritive value.  The ten essential  amino acids are; Valine, Leucine,
Isoleucine, Threonine, Methionine, Phenylalanine, Tryptophan,
Histidine, Argine, and Lysine.  All ten of these must be present within
the protein for a dog to receive any use of the protein at all.  Other amino
acids that are considered non essential  amino acids are; Alanine,
Asparagine, Aspartic Acid, Cystine, Glutamic Acid, Glutamine, Glysine,
Proline, Serine and Tyrosine.  The non-essential  amino acids can be
produced by the dog (in vivo) and therefore are not required in the dog's
bulk food intake.  The essential  amino acids are the ones that must be
in their food.
The vitamin team:
There are three types of vitamins required for proper canine
nutrition: The water soluble vitamins of B-1, B-2, B-6, B-12, niacin or
niacinamide, biotin, folic acid, d-calcium pantothenate, and para amino
benzoic acid; The fat soluble vitamins of A, D, and E; and those vitamins
like C and K that can be produced by the dog (in vivo) and therefore are
not required in the dog's bulk food intake.  I also include the nutrients
of choline and inositol within the B complex vitamin team.  These two
nutrients are not considered vitamins.  However, they work directly with
the water soluble B vitamins and are so closely related that I place them
in the same team.
9
The mineral team:
The minerals essential for canine nutrition consist of Calcium,
Phosphorus, Potassium, Sodium, Chloride, Magnesium, Manganese,
Iron, Copper, Iodine, Selenium, and Zinc.  The common practice of
adding one team member (Calcium) to a dog's diet by pet owners often
produces the best example of the danger of imbalancing a nutritional
team.  This practice provides quantities of calcium that are too far out
of proportion to the other team members.  There have been many studies
done that show adding calcium without the proper balance of the rest of
its team mates can deform the skeletal structure in puppies.  These
studies are those most often used by nutritionists working for dog food
companies to show the dangers of supplementing their "balanced" all-
breed dog food.  This team is also directly linked to the vitamins that are
fat soluble and the balance between these two teams is extremely
important.
The trace mineral team:
This team is directly related to both the mineral and vitamin
teams.  The trace mineral team consists of; Cobalt, Molybdenum,
Copper, Fluorine, Iron, Arsenic, Magnesium, Zinc, Chromium, and
Manganese.   As you can see, many trace minerals appear to be the same
as those listed as minerals.  The main difference between those with the
same name but found in a different category is their molecular
configuration.  Due to the unique molecular configuration of trace
minerals they are very fragile.  For example; the simple stone grinding
process of wheat flour can cause from 70% to 90% of the natural trace
mineral  Iron to be destroyed.  However, the same process would have
little effect on the mineral  form of Iron.
The enzyme team:
The enzyme team consists of Lypase, Amylase, and Trypsin.
The dog's Pancreas secretes these enzymes into the intestines where
they perform their team functions.  Enzymes, like the nonessential
amino acids of proteins that are produced by the dog in vivo, are not
required in a healthy dog's bulk food intake.  However, when supplemental
enzymes are required, it is very important that they are manufactured in
such a manner as to be released in the proper place within the dog's
digestive system.  The pancreas secretes its digestive enzymes into the
digestive system when the food has already been exposed to several
other digestive processes.  By the time the food is exposed to the
enzymes, the teeth have torn the food into smaller size, the acids and
bacteria of the digestive system have started their work on the food, and
so forth.
10
Enzymes have very specific duties to perform, and as with all digestive
functions, there is a proper time and place for each specific function.
When supplemental enzymes are introduced into the digestive process
in the wrong place, they can interfere with the functions of individual
nutrients or other nutritional teams.
The fiber team:
The fiber team is one of those teams that is often overlooked.
However, the work it performs plays a major function in canine
nutrition.  Fiber is responsible for slowing the food's movement
throughout the digestive system, thus allowing each part of that system
the time to perform its function properly.  Also fiber and bacteria join
in the dogs gut to produce vitamin K.
One important thing to consider with fiber is how it differs by source.
A wild carnivore may add fiber to its diet by eating the bark of a tree or
grasses such as wheat or oats.  The major differences here would be that
tree bark will not swell in the gut like oats.  Oats can swell up to ten times
in size when they come into contact with a canine's gastric juices.  Note:
swelling of fiber can cause a problem if there are large quantities of this
fiber from the wrong source in the dog's dietary intake.  The swelling can
produce a bulk within the intestine, which can impact the system.  On
the other hand, some sources of fiber that do not swell, like that from tree
bark, may not allow the proper growth of bacteria in a dog's gut for that
dog's in vivo production of vitamin K.  It is very important to match the
fiber source in the dietary intake of a dog with sources found in the
breed's native environment.
The fatty acid team:
There are three fatty acids a dog must have to be able to produce
the arachidonic acids that its body requires.  The three fatty acids are:
Oleic Acid, Linolenic Acid, and Linoleic Acid.  All three are found
together in any natural source containing what is called the Alpha-
Linolenate family.  The classic symptom of a fatty acid deficiency is a
dry and brittle coat. The breeds that produce skin oils also will require
a different balance of this team than those breeds that do not produce
skin oils.  The fatty acid team should not be confused with "fat", which
is more a source of nutritional carbohydrates.  However, some types of
animal fats do contain both carbohydrates and small amounts of the fatty
acids.  Vegetables and grains such as wheat bran, corn, linseed, or soy
beans normally contain the highest concentrations of the Alpha-
Linolenate family.
11
The carbohydrate team:
Carbohydrate requirements change at very specific times in a
dog's life cycle and in times of stress or work.  Canines cannot
"carbohydrate stack" (store carbohydrates for energy) as humans can,
but they turn carbohydrates from the dietary intake into instant energy.
Puppies and geriatric dogs should receive much of their energy from
high carbohydrate food rather than from high protein food.  Dogs
convert high carbohydrate food into energy in a short time after
ingesting it.  They will need to be fed more often during the day to
maintain proper energy levels.  Also, in the time of lactation, the bitch
will turn some carbohydrates into a very special form of milk sugars for
her puppies' energy requirements.  Producing energy from dietary
carbohydrates can be much easier on the dog's body than the process of
producing energy from protein.  Protein must be stored in muscle tissue
and then withdrawn for conversion into energy.
The bacteria team:
Like fiber, bacteria is a part of canine nutrition too often taken
for granted.  A wild carnivore will often bury its kill, after eating the guts
(high in bacteria content), to let the carcass rot prior to eating it.  This
rotting is nothing more than allowing bacteria to break down the muscle
tissue to make it more digestible.  The bacteria team also works very
closely with the fiber team within the digestive system to develop and
grow cultures.  These cultures in turn produce vitamin K in the dog's gut.
New research is now being done with bacteria to study its role in canine
nutrition, and its importance is becoming more defined.
Note: Bacteria is found throughout the dog's digestive system.  Bacteria
in the mouth should not be removed by chemicals so that the dog will
have sweet smelling breath.  This is a human's cultural hang-up, and one
that can cause dietary distress in canines by removing a very essential
nutritional part from a dog's digestive process.
The water team:
Water is the most important nutrient team.  Water comprises
over 60% of a dog's body weight.  Deprivation of water causes death
faster than deprivation of any other nutrient.  Water also works with
ALL the other nutrient teams in the performance of their individual or
collective functions.  Water intake is normally in balance with water loss
through the dog's urine, lungs, skin and feces.  The loss of water through
each method depends on factors such as activity levels, stress levels and
the environmental temperatures.  Water must be replaced continuously
because the loss of water is continuous.
12
This means that the dog must always have access to water.  However,
not all water is the same.  Well water from an area high in soil minerals
also will be high in those minerals unless treated.  Many cities treat their
water supply with chemicals.  Each city will use different chemicals and
treatment processes depending upon the sources of their water.  The end
product called "water" may only be similar to "water" from another city
for the mere fact it is a liquid.  Dogs can develop diarrhea from a sudden
change in the sources of any nutrient and water is no exception.
Therefore, I recommend you try to provide water from the home source
when traveling with a dog.  This can be done by taking along water from
home or you can acclimate your dog to a specific type of bottled water
before the trip.  Then all you need to do is buy the same type of bottled
water as needed during the trip.
There are dangers in breaking down nutritional teams of solid food and
liquids into their component parts and in turn further breaking down
each of these components.  One danger is that a person doing research
in the field of nutrition can become too focused on a specific nutrient and
disregard how that one nutrient interacts with other nutrients.  For
example; we all know that it takes calcium to build heathy bones.
Knowing this one fact  and taking it out of context can lead to problems.
Adding lots of calcium to a puppy's food, without the other nutrients
calcium interacts with for building bones, can be counter productive.
Another danger occurs when the researcher is looking for a specific
result.  When the researcher achieves his goal, he does not carry on to
see what other areas have been effected.  The best example of this would
be the research on a product to change the elasticity of the muscles
holding the hip joint together, thus changing the occurrence of hip
dysplasia.  Such a product has been researched and is available.
However, that product also damages an otherwise healthy dog's liver
and kidney.
When considering the field of canine nutrition and formulating a proper
diet for your dog, I feel that a holistic view must be taken.
Therefore, again I will emphasize that I feel the balancing of all  the
parts of each nutritional team is the most important factor.
13
Each breed of dog has
physical or temeramental characteristics
that are different from any other breed.
The question is
NOT IF those characteristics affect
a breed's nutritional requirements
BUT HOW MUCH do they affect a
breed's nutritional requirements?
WE SHOULD KNOW:
A thick boned breed of dog
will need different amounts
of the bone building minerals
than a thin boned breed of dog.
14
PROTEIN
AND ITS AMINO ACIDS
Protein is one of the most important parts of dog food, as well as one of
the least understood by the average dog owner.  Most people have the
misconception that the amount of protein the food contains is the
important factor.  However, the important factor is: How much of the
food's protein can be used by the animal consuming it?  To determine
the amount of usable protein, we must first break protein down into its
component parts.  These parts are called amino acids. There are two
classifications for amino acids of dietary protein; (1) essential - those
that the dog's own body cannot  manufacture in sufficient quantities and
(2) non essential - those that the dog's own body can  manufacture in
sufficient quantities.  It is the presence, balance and quality of the
essential amino acids that determines the bio-nutritive value (% of
usable protein) of the protein in a dog's feeding program.
All the amino acids, both essential and non-essential, have very specific
nutritional jobs within the dog's body; such as the building of the muscle
tissue, the regulation of antibodies within the immune system, and the
transfer of nerve impulses etc.
The essential amino acids and some of their functions for a dog are:
ARGININE:   This essential amino acid stimulates immune system
response by enhancing the production of T-cells, has a protective effect
of toxicity of hydrocarbons and intravenous diuretics, is related to the
elevated ammonia levels and cirrhosis of the liver by detoxifying
ammonia, and induces growth hormone release from the pituitary gland.
HISTIDINE:   This essential amino acid releases histamines from body
stores, is associated with pain control, is associated with arthritis, and
widens small blood vessels; thus aiding early digestion by stimulating
stomach acid secretion.
ISOLEUCINE and LEUCINE:  see VALINE
LYSINE:    This essential amino acid promotes bone growth in puppies,
stimulates secretion of gastric juices, and is found in abundance within
muscle tissue, connective tissue, and collagen.
15
METHIONINE:  This essential amino acid assists gall bladder functions
by participating in the synthesis of blue salts, helps to prevent deposits
and cohesion of fats in the liver due to lipotropic function, is related to
the synthesis of choline, balances the urinary tract pH (in its dl form),
and gives rise to Taurine (an important neuroregulator in the brain).
PHENYLALANINE:   This essential amino acid stimulates
chaleceptokinin enzymes and thus is related to appetite control, increases
blood pressure in hypotension, works with minerals in skin and hair
pigmentation, gives rise to Tyrosine, and produces adrenaline and
noradrenalin.
THREONINE:    This essential amino acid regulates energy draw
requirements, works with Phenylalanine in mood elevation or depression
and skin pigmentation, manufactures adrenaline, and precurses Thyroid
hormone.
TRYPTOPHAN:   This essential amino acid produces Serotonin that
induces sleep, precurses the vitamin Niacin in treating and preventing
pellagra, and is a vasoconstrictor that appears to aid in blood clotting
mechanisms.  Studies indicate a lack of tryptophan  and methionine
together can cause hair loss.
VALINE, (ISOLEUCINE AND LEUCINE):   These essential amino
acids work together and are classified as "branched-chain" amino acids.
The three combine to regulate the protein turnover and energy
metabolism, are stored in muscle tissue, and are released to be converted
into energy during times of fasting or between meals.
Listed above are the ten amino acids that are essential for a dog's dietary
requirements.  Note humans only require eight essential amino acids in
our dietary intake, and for this reason a dog could starve if given the
same protein sufficient to sustain human life.
Other factors to consider concerning a specific dog's protein requirements
are:
(1)  The age of a dog can change its protein requirements.  Both
puppies and geriatric dogs require lower amounts of protein
and higher carbohydrate %'s in their food.
(2) The dog's activity level or stress level (due to environment or
working conditions) can change its protein requirements.
(3) A bitch during the gestation and lactation period has her own
very specific requirements.
16
(4)The other ingredients within the food can affect the amount of
each amino acid required.  For example, a food that is highly
acidic (due to a preservative) can increase the requirement of
the amino acid Methionine.
The problem of selecting the proper protein blend for a specific dog can
be very confusing but can be simplified by applying this single rule:
When choosing the protein blend that is best for a specific breed of dog
look for the protein sources that were in that specific breed's native
environment and then match them as closely as possible.
When considering an environment's protein sources you should take
many factors into consideration.  First, with the environment's meat
protein sources you should remember to look beyond labels such as
cattle  before assuming that they are describing beef.  In some parts of
the world the term cattle  can be referring to a herd of goats, water
buffalos, or reindeer.  Cattle  may not always mean beef from the state
of Texas.  Also with each protein source the amino acid balance can be
different depending upon the environment from which we take our
sample.  When testing food sources, we find that herring  from the
Pacific Ocean has a different amino acid profile than herring  from the
Atlantic Ocean.  Also, Texas longhorn cattle produces beef  with a
different amino acid profile than Pennsylvania dairy cattle beef.
Second, consider all the protein sources of the area to establish if that
environment's meat protein is the type of protein that is best for a specific
breed.  For example;  The Chow Chow developed in an area of China
where meat is available as a dietary source of protein.  However, the
meat source of protein was the Chow Chow and it was available to the
humans.  The Chow was fed grains to produce a tender and nicely
marbled meat for the human's table.  This breed's development as a
vegetarian also explains why today's Chow Chow has the jaw and flat
tooth structure of a grain eater.  Also, why today's Chow Chow has a
body with a high fat to low muscle fiber ratio.  Therefore, after
considering all the factors for a Chow Chow's dietary protein, it may be
best to use only the vegetable sources of protein found in its native
environment.
Third, the amount of each protein source used in a single dog food
becomes important since the amount of each source found in a specific
environment can be quite different.  A breed that developed in an
environment that had few grain crops would need less grain in their food
17
than a breed that developed in an area where grain protein comprised the
bulk of their dietary protein intake.
Fourth,  the blend of protein sources is important since different sources
of dietary protein contain different amounts of both the essential and
non-essential amino acids.  For example, equal amounts of lamb meat,
beef, fish, chicken, or horse meat from the same environment will
contain different amounts of essential amino acids.  Sources such as soy,
corn, rice, beet, wheat, and alfalfa also contain very specific amounts of
essential and non-essential amino acids in their protein.
The following two tables show how different protein food sources can
provide different amounts or types of protein.
Table P-1:  The differences in protein and fat ratios of different meat
sources from different areas of the world.
Food source:              % of Protein    Protein to Fat ratio
Domesticated Pig
12.5 %
 1 to 3
Wild Warthog
13.0 %
10 to 1
Western Domesticated Beef
11.6 %
 1 to 3
Western Wild Venison
14.0 %
 7 to 1
East African Eland
12.0 %
 6 to 1
East African Buffalo
15.0 %
 5 to 1
Table P-2:  The following table shows relative comparisons for amino
acid amounts of some common commercial dog food protein sources.
Arg
Cys
His
Iso
Leu
Lys
Met
Phe
Thr
Try
Tyr  Val
Chicken
1378
311
655
1125
1653
1765
591
899
922
257
732 1100
Turkey
1979
308
845
1409
2184
2557
790
1100
1227
311
1066 1464
Beef
   -
   -
   -
1329
2081
2220
631
1045
1122
297
   -
1411
Lamb
   -
   -
   -
1068
1595
1667
494
837
943
267
   -
1015
Pork
   -
   -
   -
1510
2164
2414
733
1157
1364
382
   -
1529
Soybeans
   -
   -
   -
649
935
759
165
594
423
165
   -
638
Tuna
1518
   -
1619
1316
2024
2327
810
1012
1214
   -
303 1417
Herring (Atl)
   -
   -
   -
882
1315
1522
502
640
761
173
   -
934
Herring (Pac)     -
   -
   -
892
1312
1522
508
648
752
175
   -
928
Note: the above table compares meat to meat,
   not to a meal or by-product source.
18
Food source (100 g. each)
        Amino Acids
FAT CARBOHYDRATES
AND
FATTY ACIDS
There are differences between the dog and human in their use of
carbohydrates.  This includes the use of different forms of carbohydrates
from starch or sugar.  For example; we know sugar forms of lactose,
dextrose or glucose are all different as dietary sources of carbohydrates.
These can be stored or used as an instant energy supply by a human.
Also, we know how a human stores carbohydrates from some starch
sources better than sugar sources for future energy requirements.  Only
the human can store dietary carbohydrates for later conversion into
energy.  Canines turn all dietary carbohydrates, from any source, into
instant energy, and none is stored for energy requirements that develop
later.  Also, for all types of dogs, all forms of sugar carbohydrates
have been found to be detrimental, except for lactose found in the milk
of a lactating bitch for her  puppy.  Please Note; this form of lactose is
not the same as a synthetic lactose from sugar beet or sugar cane or even
the lactose found in the milk of other species of mammals.
Like the sugar carbohydrates of lactose, glucose and dextrose being
different, carbohydrates found in animal fat, vegetable and grain sources
(soy bean, beet pulp, wheat, rice, potatoes or corn) are all different.
These differences are important.  One study cited in the NRC publication
Nutrient Requirements of Dogs shows that the digestible fat from one
source provides 2.25 times the metabolizable energy concentration of
digestible carbohydrate than from a second source.  Another study cited
showed different breeds of dog need different amounts of carbohydrates
or different carbohydrate to protein ratios in their food.  Therefore, if
your dog is requiring a high carbohydrate diet due to breed requirements
or life-style, you need to provide those carbohydrates in the proper
amount and from the proper source.
When you are considering which food source of carbohydrates contains
the proper form for your dog, you should consider the type of food
sources that were in the native environment for your breed.  Then also
remember to eliminate those sources that would have been foreign to
that breed's native environment.  A dog breed from Ireland, where
potatoes or flax were common dietary sources of carbohydrates, would
not have been exposed to rice.
19
Yet a dog breed from China could have been exposed to several different
types of rice that were grown as common sources of dietary carbohydrates
in its environment.  A dog breed from a mountain environment, where
both vegetable and grain crops are scarce, could have a different need
for its carbohydrate source as well.  Some mountain breeds of dog may
not utilize potato or rice carbohydrate any better than a sugar, but best
use an animal fat form of carbohydrate.
Animal fat is one of the most common carbohydrate sources found in
commercial dog food and because a food contains animal fat, it is often
assumed it is providing dietary fatty acids.  Normally this is not so since
animal fat in dog food is exposed to extremely high temperatures during
processing procedures. The high temperature can eliminate the
polyunsaturated fatty acid content of the rendered fat.  In many cases
manufacturers use separate food sources to provide fat carbohydrates
and polyunsaturated fatty acids in their foods.  The better commercial
dog food manufacturers use grain or vegetable oils that have been cold
pressed or processed to retain the needed polyunsaturated fatty acids.
These cold pressed grain and vegetable oils still contain the fatty acids
known as the alpha-Linolenate family.  There are three fatty acids that
make up the entire alpha-Linolenate family; oleic acid, linolenic acid,
and linoleic acid.  With breeds that produce skin oil, the requirement for
the oleic acid part of the alpha-Linolenate family is higher than with the
breeds that do not produce skin oils.  However, it is essential for all dogs
to receive all three of these fatty acids to produce the arachidonic acids
they all require.  Since these fatty acids are a complete nutritional team,
they should be listed on labels in the same way that manufacturers of
premium foods list the amino acid content of their food's protein.
Manufacturers who list all three on the label provide you with a more
accurate statement of the package contents.  This labeling practice
enables you to choose more intelligently the proper food for your
specific breed of dog.
In processed dog foods animal fat should be considered as only a source
of dietary carbohydrates.  After the rendering process, it contains very
little of the alpha-Linolenate fatty acids.  A complete diet for most
breeds of dog should contain both animal fat and a source containing the
alpha-Linolenate family of polyunsaturated fatty acids.  Do not assume
fatty acids are present just because the dog food label has fat listed.  The
finished product may or may not have any fatty acids.  Commercial food
manufacturers may add animal fat just for its carbohydrate content or to
make it more palatable for most canines.
20
Also do not assume that the product contains all three of the fatty acids
of the alpha-Linolenate family if the label only lists Linoleic acid.  This
one fatty acid can be purchased separately as a raw material for dog food.
Table F-1:  The following table shows relative comparisons for some
common commercial dog food fat and fatty acid sources.
         alpha-Linolenate Fatty Acids
Food  source
 oleic acid
 linolenic acid       linoleic acid
Rendered Chicken  fat
under 0.1%
  under 0.1%
 under 0.1%
Rendered Beef fat
under 0.1%
  under 0.1%
 under 0.1%
Rendered Pork fat
 under 0.1%
  under 0.1%
 under 0.1%
Cold pressed Linseed oil
       36%
       11.4%
     42.5%
Cold pressed Wheat germ oil
       30%
       10.8%
     44.1%
Cold  pressed  Soy bean oil
       26%
       11.0%
     49.0%
Both carbohydrates and fatty acids are important and both must be
provided in dog foods.  However, you must use a source of carbohydrates
or fatty acids that can be assimilated by the breed of dog you are feeding.
An indicator that your dog is rejecting food carbohydrates from sugar,
grains, vegetables or animal fat in the food is persistent diarrhea.  The
indicator that your dog is not assimilating the fatty acids is a loss of coat
shine or a loss in the skin's elasticity.  Therefore, it is easy for the dog
owner to see a dietary carbohydrate or fatty acid nutritional problem.
Conversely, it is also easy to see when foods are supplying the proper
sources and amounts of these important nutrients.
21
Each breed of dog has
physical or temeramental characteristics
that are different from any other breed.
The question is
NOT IF those characteristics affect
a breed's nutritional requirements
BUT HOW MUCH do they affect a
breed's nutritional requirements?
WE SHOULD KNOW:
A black / thick / long / double coat will filter out
the suns ultraviolet light
differently than a white / thin / short / single coat.
&
Because the sun's ultraviolet light
manufactures vitamin D on a dog's skin
that different breeds can have
different requirements for this one nutrient.
22
INDIVIDUAL FUNCTIONS OF
VITAMINS & MINERALS
Vitamin A  Important for healthy skin, hair, eyes, and normal bone
growth.
Vitamin B-1  Essential in the metabolism of carbohydrates and protein.
Deficiency causes heart and nerve disease.
Vitamin B-2  Essential for normal growth, healthy skin and hair.  It has
been used as a natural aid in coping with stress.
Vitamin B-6  Essential for normal blood, nerves and growth, and
metabolism of protein.
Vitamin B-12  Important in the development and maintenance of
normal blood cells.
Vitamin D  Needed to assimilate the calcium and phosphorous in the
development of normal teeth and bones.
Vitamin E  Protects against effects of oxidized or unstable fats in diet.
It is important for reproduction and helps the body use Vitamin A.
Niacinamide  Helps to maintain the integrity of mouth tissue and the
nervous system and is essential in converting food to energy.
Biotin  Present as a member of the B Complex in nature and is associated
with normal growth, healthy skin and hair.
Folic Acid  A hematopoietic vitamin, used for normal blood, growth and
health of the fetus.
d-Calcium Pantothenate  Required for the formation of certain
hormones and nerve-regulating substances and to maintain the proper
level of blood sugars.
Para Amino Benzoic Acid  Helps the body use proteins, fats, and
carbohydrates.  It is important in the body's rejection of infection.
23
Selenium  Interacts with Vitamin E and is associated with normal liver,
muscle, and reproductive function.
Lecithin  Significant constituent of nervous tissue and brain substance.
It also breaks down cholesterol and prevents fatty infiltration of the heart
and liver.
Calcium  Essential for formation of normal teeth and bones and is
important in the transmission of nerve impulses, and muscle contraction.
Copper  Works within the digestive system for normal iron use and
maintenance of normal bones and hair.
Iodine  Necessary for normal thyroid function and works with protein
to form thyroxines in the thyroid gland.
Iron  Important to the transfer of oxygen in blood and muscles and is
essential to the development and maintenance of normal red blood cells.
Magnesium  Necessary for normal tooth and bone formation and is
important to cellular energy transfer and normal muscle and heart
function.
Manganese  Assists magnesium and other minerals in the formation of
normal teeth and bones.
Phosphorus  Essential to storage and release of energy in blood cells.
It must be present for formation of normal teeth and bones.
Potassium  Necessary for normal body growth, fluid balance, and
muscle contraction.
Zinc  Essential constituent of insulin and is necessary for normal growth
and healthy skin and hair.
Note:  Please do not take the information in this one chapter out of the
context of the book.  Remember that each of these nutrients is a team
member and should be provided in balance with the other team nutrients
as outlined in the chapter on "Nutritional Teamwork."
24
Supplementing
Webster's New World Dictionary defines supplement: (sup. ple. ment)
as: something added, esp. to make up for a lack or deficiency.
Supplementing is a two edged sword; there is good supplementing and
there is bad supplementing.
All dog food manufacturers add various ingredients to their foods
during the manufacturing process so that the end product contains levels
that meet industry standards.  For example, to make protein that dogs
can use the manufacturer may add various protein sources that have one
or more of the essential amino acids.  They do this until they have a
protein blend that contains all ten essential amino acids.  Thus, by the
process defined as supplementing, the dog food company manufactures
a food that will have nutritional value.  The same supplementing is done
to achieve nutritional levels of vitamins, minerals and other ingredients
in all commercially manufactured dog food.  Most foods are brought to
levels that have been established by the government National Research
Council (NRC) as the Minimum Nutrient Requirements of Dogs.  When
dog food companies have added ingredients to reach NRC recommended
levels, they have also reached the industry standards to advertise the
food as "complete and balanced."
These NRC or "complete and balanced" levels are also established to
provide safe levels for all dogs.  For example, the NRC subcommittee
recommends that dog foods supply 8 IU of vitamin D per kilogram of
a dog's body weight. This is 8 IU/kg. for any breed of dog's body weight,
even though tests cited in a NRC publication show that some breeds
require higher amounts of vitamin D (up to 270 IU/kg.).  Since vitamin
D is a "fat soluble" vitamin, overdoses of this vitamin are dangerous.
If manufacturers added enough vitamin D to meet the higher requirements
of the few breeds that require 270 IU/kg., the food would actually be
toxic to the many breeds who only require 8 IU/kg.
The dog food companies take care to not exceed the safe all-breed levels
of any nutrient that could be harmful to a breed.  They have no control
over which breed of dog will consume their food.
25
Many studies show that any supplementing of a single nutrient to
safe "complete and balanced" dog food levels can be dangerous.
Some examples are:
A) Excess supplemental calcium can block the assimilation of the
copper, iron, phosphorus and zinc in the dietary intake.
B) Excess supplemental vitamin A (a fat soluble vitamin) can
decalcify the teeth and bones and cause liver damage.
C) Any supplemental vitamin C can cause a detrimental pH change
in the kidney and cause a healthy liver to lose its ability to
function properly.
D) Excess supplemental vitamin D (a fat soluble vitamin) can block
calcium assimilation or collect in the glands to levels that can be
toxic.
E) Any supplemental fluoride or fluorine can mottle tooth enamel
during the period of calcification of permanent teeth in dogs.  It
also can block the assimilation of dietary trace minerals and alter
the dog's natural ability to produce vitamin K.
F) Any supplemental thyroid can cause a healthy thyroid gland to
lose its ability to function properly.
Supplementing can be dangerous when any one nutrient is added in
quantities that negatively affect how the dog's body reacts to the other
nutrients in the same nutritional complex, or when by supplementing we
change or take over the function of a vital organ.
To avoid potential dangers, most dog food companies make a blanket
recommendation that you do not supplement their foods.
When dog food companies recommend that you do not supplement
their food, they are correct .  .  .  about 50% correct!
What they haven't told you is that there is another side to the issue.  The
side that shows that the safe all-breed levels they have in their all-breed
foods are not sufficient nutritional amounts for all dogs.  The safe all-
breed amounts may be enough to keep any dog alive.  But the safe all-
breed amounts will not provide the correct amounts or balance to sustain
optimum health for some breeds of dogs.  All-breed foods, even though
they contain nutritional levels that allow them to be classified by
industry standards as "complete and balanced", also must be
supplemented above these levels to provide proper nutrition for most
dogs.
26
Dog owners may recognize their animals are not in the optimum of
health because the all-breed foods they are using are lacking the proper
nutrient amounts for their dogs.  Then with the best intentions, they may
choose to ignore the dog food companies' recommendations about
supplementing and experiment with their dogs dietary intake.
Experimenting with supplements usually produces negative, or at best,
limited  results.
Supplementing dog food is a complicated process.  It is possible to do
it correctly at the time of manufacturing, if the manufacturer is making
a breed specific food.
There is only one way that dog foods should be supplemented during the
manufacturing process:
Step one is to calculate the nutritional requirements of the
specific breed of dog that will be eating that food.
Step two is to determine which sources of each nutrient have
the proper molecular formation for that breed of dog to assimilate.
Step three is to find food bases with these sources.
Step four is to acquire quantities of the nutrients from the
proper sources.
Step five is to blend the proper amount of each of these nutrients
to bring the levels and balances in the finished food to the proper
levels and balances for that specific breed of dog's requirements.
It is also possible to supplement a premanufactured all-breed formula
correctly.
Step one is to calculate the nutritional requirements of the
specific breed of dog involved.
Step two is to determine which sources of each nutrient have
the proper molecular formation for this breed of dog to assimilate.
27
Step three is to find a premanufactured all-breed formula with
these sources.
Step four is to analyze the bulk food to determine what levels
are already present.
Step five is to acquire quantities of the additional nutrients
needed (these also must be from the proper sources).
Step six is to blend the proper amount of each of these
additional nutrients to bring the levels and balances in the final
food blend to the proper levels and balances for that specific
breed of dog's requirements.
But here I caution you:  Do not compound the problems that now exist
in feeding a safe but nutritionally inadequate all-breed dog food by
supplementing it with an unsafe or imbalanced all-breed supplement.
28
NUTRIENTS BENEFICIAL
TO HUMANS  . . . BUT . . .
HARMFUL TO DOGS
There are many nutritional similarities between a dog and a human, but
we also have many differences.  The human has an average of 32
permanent teeth (with structural differences depending on the race).
The dog has an average of 42 permanent teeth (with structural differences
depending on the breed).  The human has a long gastrointestinal tract
consisting of both a large and a small intestine.  The dog has a short
gastrointestinal tract consisting of a single colon.  Similar glands found
within both humans and canines are located differently within their
respective digestive systems and some glands, such as the liver, perform
different functions.  The human has starch breaking enzymes in the
saliva, the dog does not.  The human can store carbohydrates for energy,
the dog cannot.  The human can receive bio-nutritive value from protein
containing 8 essential amino acids, the dog requires 10 essential amino
acids to receive bio-nutritive value.  A stimulant in chocolate called
theobromine can be deadly for dogs but not for humans.  Etc.
Because of the differences, there are certain nutrients beneficial when
they are in a human's dietary intake that can be harmful in a dog's dietary
intake.   Two of the most common nutrients I have found in commercial
canine dietary products that fall into this category are Fluorine and
Vitamin C.
Fluorine:
Fluorine, as sodium fluoride, was added to the water of most commercial
sources within the U.S. after extensive research showed that it hardened
the tooth enamel in children and thus helped to prevent tooth decay.
However, the same type of research has been performed on the dog, with
the results being quite different.  To find some research with fluorine and
canines we need to look into the history books.  In 1936 (Biester et. al.)
conducted research showing that the addition of fluorine to the water
supply of canines caused mottling of the tooth enamel during the period
of calcification of the permanent teeth.  In 1959 (Andreeva) reported
findings that the addition of fluorine at 20 milligrams per kilogram of
body weight daily for 92 days to the diet of month-old pups altered
serum calcium and inorganic and organic phosphorus concentrations
significantly.
29
There are many other tests that show fluorine can cause many nutritionally
related problems.  Fluorine should not be included within the dietary
intake of any breed of dog.
Therefore, I suggest that you filter the dog's water supply to eliminate
the fluorine.  This can be done by adding an inexpensive filter to the
water supply for the kennel.  By properly locating the filter you can
remove the fluorine from the dog's water while leaving the fluorine in
the main water supply to meet the human's needs.
Vitamin C:
Vitamin C is an essential nutrient for all mankind.  However, one of the
most common errors when looking at this one vitamin is to think that all
vitamin C is the same.  Often vitamin C is referred to as ascorbic acid,
or vice versa, even though ascorbic acid is only one form of vitamin
C.  Ascorbic acid is the most common synthetic form used in the U. S.
and is also found in both a "L" and a "D" form.  Since the "D" form is
unsafe for human use, only the "L" form is sold commercially.  L.
Pauling in his book VITAMIN C AND THE COMMON COLD
discusses both the "L" and "D" forms of ascorbic acid.  THE MERCK
INDEX, an encyclopedia of chemicals and drugs, also lists these two
forms
The three most common synthetic forms of vitamin C sold in the U. S.
are Ascorbic Acid (C6H8O6), Calcium Ascorbate (C12H14CaO12),
and Sodium Ascorbate (C6H7NaO6).  Note that the molecular forms
within the ( )'s are all different.  In addition, none of these forms are the
same as the natural vitamin C found in fresh fruit.  They also differ from
the vitamin C that a dog and certain other animals can manufacture
within their glandular systems.
Another common error associated with vitamin C is to assume that the
human and the dog are both the same in their dietary need of this
nutrient.  A very basic difference between dogs and humans is found in
their glandular systems.  Using the trace mineral form of Cobalt as the
primary element, when all the other trace minerals are present within
their diet, the dog's liver has the ability to synthesize the cobalt to
produce the vitamin C that its body requires.  The human glandular
system is not capable of producing its own vitamin C.  For this reason,
it is essential for humans, but not dogs, to include vitamin C in their
30
As an interesting side light I note:  The source of the vitamin C that a
human should use in their dietary intake also can be an important factor.
A recent study conducted by the University of Oregon (1987), discovered
that the American Eskimo people are unable to use the synthetic forms
of vitamin C.  This includes ascorbic acid, or even those natural forms
found in fresh fruit to prevent the onset of scurvy.  However, they are
able to prevent scurvy by eating seal blubber that contains a special and
unique molecular form of vitamin C.  The seal produces this form of
vitamin C in much the same way that a dog does by synthesizing trace
minerals in the liver.  The seal then stores this "fat soluble" form of
vitamin C in the blubber, just under the skin.  This fat soluble form,
which is stored in seal blubber, is also different in its molecular structure
than ascorbil palmitate, a commercial synthetic "fat soluble"  vitamin C.
Research done with dogs documenting their vitamin C requirements is
readily available.  For example, the government has published the
results from research projects with vitamin C in their 1985 revision of
the NRC NUTRIENT REQUIREMENTS OF DOGS.  On pages 37 and
38 of the NRC publication they cite twenty five carefully controlled
studies.  An excerpt says: "and some veterinary practitioners apparently
advocate vitamin C for - - -", and continues "- - - conducted some
carefully controlled studies concerned with these issues and established
that exogenous vitamin C was of no benefit. "  One controlled study cited
in the NRC showed that supplemental vitamin C aggravated skeletal
disease in Labrador Retriever puppies.  From these controlled studies
the government subcommittee on animal nutrition states: "It is concluded
that there is no adequate evidence to justify recommendation of
routine vitamin C additions to the diet of the normal dog."
Other studies have shown that supplemental vitamin C from the ascorbic
acid source can create a pH imbalance in the dog's kidney.  This is due
to ascorbic acid, which is "water soluble", being discharged through the
kidney.  These studies also show where this change in the urinary tract
pH can negatively affect the use of many other essential nutrients.
Another negative aspect of giving vitamin C to a healthy dog is the risk
taken when we replace one of the functions of a healthy dog's liver
(producing the vitamin C that its own body requires).
31
By adding vitamin C to the dog's diet we can cause the dog's liver
to stop working as it should.  This can best be equated to feeding
thyroid medication to a dog with a normal thyroid gland.
The Morris Animal Foundation in 1987 released the findings of a survey
determining the main causes of dogs' deaths in the United States.  The
second and sixth leading causes cited in that report were kidney
disorders and liver failure.  I cannot help but wonder at the connection
between these statistics and the use of ascorbic acid in dog food or dog
food supplements.
Even after all the negative test results cited by the National Research
Council, many dog food manufacturers still add ascorbic acid to their
dog foods.  These test results have been confirmed by companies within
the dog food industry itself.  One company; Gains Pet Food Corp., has
published a book titled BASIC GUIDE TO CANINE NUTRITION.  On
page 21 in their fifth edition of that book they state:  "Vitamin C
(ascorbic acid) is not required in the diet of dogs as it is in the diets of
primates, guinea pigs, bats and some fish, birds, and insects.  The dog
and other animals are able to synthesize this vitamin."
Why do many dog food manufacturers have ascorbic acid in their foods?
The reason is ascorbic acid is an antioxidant.  As an antioxidant,
ascorbic acid is a commonly used cheap preservative that has been used
for years to keep foods fresh, color additives bright, and to keep the fats
within the foods from going rancid.  It is a cheap preservative that most
people  can assimilate.  Therefore, people formulating dog foods, who
do not know there is a nutritional difference between dogs and humans,
assume  it to be a "safe" preservative.  The other scenario is that it is being
used by people formulating dog foods who are aware of the harm it can
do.   But these people are more concerned about keeping the colors in
their food bright and appealing for the buyer, rather than the actual
health of the dogs that are eating it.
Manufacturers of commercial dog foods must remember that when
formulating a food for dogs, the finished food product is for a dog and
not for human consumption.  The dog and the human are two different
species of animal.  We may have similarities, but we also have our
differences.  Therefore, the food should provide the nutrients that a dog
requires and should not contain nutrients that can be detrimental to the
animal for which it is formulated.
32
TRUSTING LABELS
Buyer Beware!  You could be feeding your dog poultry feathers or
sawdust.  These ingredients are often listed on a label so that you think
you are getting real chunks of poultry meat or beef.  Most dog food labels
can be confusing or misleading to the average lay person, though the
labels may be technically correct by government standards.
When you consider the competitive dog food market in the U.S.A., you
can see why the manufacturers want to have the most appealing
packaging possible.  They also need to formulate their products to be
price competitive.  To do this, many manufacturers buy their ingredients
from the cheapest source - not necessarily the best source.  Most cheaper
sources used are "feed grade" or "animal grade" food products.  Feed
grade products commonly used in commercial dog foods are corn husk,
peanut shells, oat middlings, poultry feathers, sawdust and fish heads
with skin.  These have their own set of government label requirements.
Unless you are familiar with the government list of feed grade products
and their labeling requirements, odds are you will be confused or even
misled by the label terms used.  Much of the confusion is because there
are nutritional products made for human consumption, from high
quality ingredients, that have similar sounding labeling terms.  When we
read a label on food products for an animal we assume  that if it sounds
the same it must be the same.  NOT SO!
For example, when dog food labels show protein as an ingredient, we
may assume  that the protein has food value equal to the percentage of
protein listed.  However, not all protein is nutritionally usable protein.
It is protein!  Protein that can be shown on the label because it can be
determined by a simple nitrogen analysis.  Both the federal government
and dog food industry use this analysis to confirm the label claim for
protein.  But according to this nitrogen analysis, the plastic of your
telephone or the paint on your wall also contains protein.  As far fetched
as it sounds, these protein sources could be used in dog food and the food
could be sold as a "High Protein Food."  NOTE: Present labeling laws
for dog foods require that they show the amount of protein content.  The
requirements do not ask for a break down of the protein for its amino
acid content or its bio-nutritive value.  Many low food value - high
protein feed grade sources are used in commercial dog foods.  Often they
are listed on the label as a "meal  " or "by-products ."
33
Webster defines by-product as: anything produced in the course of
making another thing; secondary or incidental product or result.
The production of meat for human consumption also produces meat
meal  and meat by-products  used in dog food.  It is important to note
that there is not necessarily any meat in the products that are put
into dog food and labeled as a "by-product ", there also may be very
little meat in the product labeled as "meal ."
For example, when the slaughter house scrapes the hair and viscera from
the hide before sending it to be tanned for leather products, they save this
for dog foods that use meat by-products.   Another meat by-product  is
sawdust from the floor of the packing house.  The sawdust on the floors
of a butchering plant catches the blood and viscera during the butchering
process and keeps the floors from getting slippery.  Therefore, the blood
soaked sawdust has become a meat by-product.  The by-product  of
poultry meat production is feathers.  On pages 48 through 61 of the
NRC's 1985 publication Nutrient Requirements of Dogs there is a list of
ingredients found in dog food, including their international feed numbers.
For example on page 60 under Poultry, entries 109-111: feathers,
hydrolyzed (international feed number 5-03-795) can be listed on a label
as Poultry by-product ; necks with backs and wings with legs, fresh
(international feed number 5-03-797) can be listed on a label as Poultry
meal ; trimmings fresh (international feed number 5-16-424) can be
listed on a label as Poultry or Poultry meat .
Obviously, Poultry meat  is what we want and what we hope we are
getting when reading a dog food label listing poultry as a food source.
However, you should remember to read the entire listing.  If the word
by-product  is used the food is just that - a by-product !
Food product manufacturers who are meeting government labeling
regulations must list the ingredients on product labels showing what the
product contains.  This is done under a heading entitled Guaranteed
Analysis  or Ingredients  on the label.  Yet representatives for dog food
manufacturers have often told me that the food they make contains real
poultry meat though the label states that it contains Poultry by-products.
Government agencies check the printed label.  If they lie on the label the
government can take the product off the market shelves.  Therefore, I
suggest that we trust the printed word more than a sales representative's
claims.
34
Most dog food manufacturers would not label their product showing a
by-product  food source if they could show the product was made with
a source that was better.  Remember that the dog food manufacturer,
in most cases, is meeting the federal label law requirements.
Also remember that when buying a dog food product it is "buyer
beware."  It is your responsibility to know how to look beyond a fancy
ad or the misleading name on the front of the package.  It is up to you
to know that "meaty flavored" or "looks just like real meat" does not
mean there is any meat in the product.
Most dog food manufacturers also use the MISLEADING CLAIM that
their dog food is "complete and balanced."  The claim "complete and
balanced" means that the manufacturer has met certain all-breed
minimums or industry standards.  The claim of "complete and balanced"
means that the food contains the complete number  and balance of
nutrients  the government suggested dog food should have as a minimum.
The claim of "complete and balanced" does not mean that a food is
nutritionally complete  or nutritionally balanced  for the requirements
of the dog that is eating it.
If you have any questions about your specific dog and the food it is
eating you should be able to ask the dog food manufacturer.  There is a
way to do this:
For the consumer's protection the federal label laws require that
manufacturers of food products include on their label the name and
postal zip code of the manufacturer or responsible distributor.  The
company listed on the label also must maintain a listed telephone
number in the area that corresponds to the postal zip code on the label.
There must be a responsible person available at that number to answer
any questions that a government inspector would want to ask.  This is
the person you should talk to, not just a sales person or receptionist.
When you get through to this person do not accept a long answer that
doesn't tell you anything.  Ask questions that can be answered by a
yes  or no  and demand clear concise answers.
For example, "Does your product contain sugar?"  can be answered by
a simple yes or no.  Yet when I asked that question to the person in charge
of Quality Control for a manufacturer of a well known dog food
supplement, I was told: "If you tested our products you could find traces
of carbohydrates."
35
The fact was, when tested, their product was 92% sugar.  However, the
sugar in this product is considered a "filler."  The government label
regulations do not require this "filler" to be listed.  Therefore, it was
legally  not shown on their label.
Also, we bought this product from a veterinary clinic. Which brings me
to another touchy subject; Who can you trust to give you good
information based on KNOWLEDGE?
An alarming fact is canine nutrition is not adequately covered in the
curriculum of most schools of veterinary medicine.  A 1989 survey
showed that the average school of veterinary medicine in the United
States donated approximately five classroom hours, one hour per day
for five day's, on all-animal nutrition in their curriculum requirements
to obtain a D. V. M..  There are exceptions, so here again, you should
ask where and how  the person giving you nutritional advice gained
their knowledge.  If they gained their knowledge by attending seminars
put on by dog food companies, and they are selling that brand of dog
food, then it is BUYER BEWARE.  However, if they are among the
conscientious veterinarians who have taken it upon themselves to study
animal nutrition from an unbiased source, you have found a gem.
When you are asking for nutritional information about a product from
anyone,  consider if the person you are asking is trying to make
money by selling you a product.  Then consider if they may be
biassing the information that they are giving you.
Trust the PRINTED word
        BUT
READ THE ENTIRE LABEL!
DO NOT ASSUME! . . . . . . .ASK!
IT IS UP TO YOU TO FIND OUT!
THE RESPONSIBILITY BELONGS TO NOBODY ELSE!
YOU CAN ONLY TRUST YOURSELF!
36
LABEL WORDING DEFINITIONS
One pet food company advertises their food as better than a cheaper
food because the main ingredient in their food is poultry meat and
(according to the ad) the cheaper foods are made with feathers. But
when we read the labels on all the different pet foods we can’t find
“feathers” listed as an ingredient in any of them. The company advertising
their food is made with poultry meat even has the same ingredients
listed on their label as those cheaper foods. Who are we to trust? The
words used on pet food labels can bide many evils. They are sometimes
misunderstood, often ignored and can be confusing. To limit confusion
when listing each ingredient in a food, all pet food companies should
be required to also use the International Feed Number (IFN) that has
been assigned to each feed grade ingredient. Then we could clearly
identify the ingredients in each pet food and be able to make intelligent
choices amongst them.
Today, words used in the ingredient list can be hiding what is really in
the food. Things like feathers, sawdust and dehydrated pig excreta all
have IFNs that would identify them. Current regulations allow
ingredients like these to be put in pet food and labeled with wording so
you don’t know they are in there.”
To help you determine what may be in the pet food you are now buying,
here are definitions of some words that can be found on most pet food
labels today:
By-product:
An ingredient produced in the course of making a primary food
ingredient a secondary or incidental product. Feathers are a by-product
of poultry meat processing. Feathers which are removed from a carcass
during production of poultry meat are then hydrolyzed (pressure
cooked with steam until they are an edible gel) which makes them an
acceptable feed grade ingredient. Hydrolyzed feathers have been
assigned the (IFN) International Feed Number 5-03-795 and can appear
on a label as “Poultry By-products.” On page 158 in the AAFCO book,
Official Publication, 1994, Association of American Feed Control
Officials Incorporated, they show: Hydrolyzed Poultry By-Products
Aggregate is the product resulting from heat treatment, or a combination
thereof, of all by-products of slaughter poultry, clean and undecomposed,
including such parts as heads, feet, underdeveloped eggs, intestines,
feathers and blood.” The IFN assigned to this mix is 5-14-508.
37
Today’s regulations allow the entire mix or any part of it to appear on
a label as “Poultry By-products.” A “Fish By-product” can contain
heads, tails, intestines and blood. This fish process residue has been
assigned the IFN 5-07-977. A “Meat By-product” could be viscera and
blood soaked sawdust from the floors of a packing house where meat
is being processed. The meat being processed can be lamb, beef, horse,
or any other source. Each one has its own IFN. Some of the animal feed
IFN’s that contain wood shavings from the floor of a processing facility
include “Dried Ruminant Waste” #1-07-526, and “Undried Processed
Animal Waste Products” #5-02-790. It is important to note that the
amount of wood shavings in either of these two “Meat By-products” is
limited and should not be more than 35% in one and 40% in the other.
When a pet food label’s list of ingredients shows the word By-product
you can be assured that there is NO measurable amount of meat in the
ingredient. If the ingredient contained enough meat that it could be
measured the pet food company would proudly list the MEAT, not just
the By-product of that meat’s production.
Mill Run:
An ingredient consisting of residue left after the primary food
product has been extracted during a milling process. A “Corn Mill
Run” would be a pulverized blend of the corn husk and cobs which are
left after a milling process has removed the kernels. Mill Run is the
vegetable or produce equivalent of meat’s by-product.
Digest:.
An animal feed-grade ingredient that must be made soluble with
the use of heat and moisture. Since these ingredients are not soluble in
their natural state they require this manufacturing process before they
can be put into pet food. An example of this would be the feet of poultry
IFN 5-07-947. When a pet food label shows “Poultry Digest” as an
ingredient this could be what is in the food.
Meal:
A ground or pulverized composite of animal feed-grade ingredients.
A good definition of a Meal is provided by AAFCO. They define
Poultry By-product Meal: Poultry By-product Meal consists of the
ground, rendered, clean parts of the carcass of slaughtered poultry,
such as necks, feet, undeveloped eggs, and intestines, exclusive of
feathers, except in such amounts as might occur unavoidably in good
processing practices. The IFN for this blend is 5-03-795. The only
MEAT that
38
might be in “Poultry By-product Meal’ 5-03-795 is what could be left
on the necks after becoming clean rendered By-products of meat
production. This is not enough that the amount of meat can even be
measured and thus have an ingredient listing showing any POULTRY
MEAT to be in the food. You should be aware that when a food’s
ingredient panel list a product with the word ‘Meal ‘that the word
‘Meal i~ not a synonym for ‘Meat.” The word Meal only means that
the product has been ground or pulverized.
Gluten:
The sticky substance in wheat or corn starch that gives the starch
its tough elastic quality. It is used to hold together the pulverized
composite of animal feed-grade ingredients.
Digestibility Test:
A test to see how much ~me it takes a food solid to break down
in a strong laboratory acid. There are companies that are claiming the
food which passes this test in the shortest amount of time provides the
best nutrition for all animals. But the word digestibility is nota
synonym for the word nutritious. Just because a food solid can be
broken down in an acid does not mean the animal eating it can
nutritionally use that kind of food. Not all dogs or cats have the same
nutritional acceptance of any one food source. Since pet foods are
made from many different food sources we could thus be making the
proverbial comparison between apples and oranges. It would be a
mistake to judge any food’s total nutritive value on one test
demonstrating how fast it breaks down in laboratory acid. Comparing
pet foods by using a Digestibility Test is valid only if the foods being
tested are of equal nutritional value for the animal that will be eating
them. Then the faster a food breaks down the easier it is for the
animal’s digestive system to make use of it.
If you are now buying a pet food with words you don’t understand on
the label you might try this: contact the manufacturer and ask them for
their definitions. If they do not give them to you in words you, the
buyer, can understand then maybe it’s time to consider home cooking
your pet’s food. You’d know what was in the food, and for thousands
of years before commercial pet food was available (just 85 years ago),
that’s what pet owners successfully did.
39
Each breed of dog has
physical or temeramental characteristics
that are different from any other breed.
The question is
NOT IF those characteristics affect
a breed's nutritional requirements
BUT HOW MUCH do they affect a
breed's nutritional requirements?
WE SHOULD KNOW:
Because the energy levels
among the different breeds are different
their nutritional requirements for food calories
would also be different.
40
LIFE CYCLE CHANGES
THAT CHANGE
NUTRITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
As your dog goes through different stages of the life cycle, its nutritional
needs change substantially.  Here are a few guidelines to follow for:  (1)
puppies, (2) the maintenance years, (3) pregnant and lactating bitches,
(4) older dogs and (5) nutritional changes due to stress.
(1) Puppies
After weaning, feed each puppy a high fat and carbohydrate diet in
small dosages 3 or 4 times per day.  Once the puppy has reached 40 to
50 percent of its adult weight, change feeding schedule to twice per day.
Remember a pup's nutritional requirements can be 6 to 10 times  more
than adult maintenance requirements.  This includes requirements for
most vitamins and minerals when measured on a per-kilogram of body
weight  basis.  This means an active 6 pound puppy can use the same
dose as a 60 pound adult dog of the same breed.  There are some breeds
of dogs that are still puppies (nutritionally speaking) even after they
have reached their full adult size.  To treat them as adults, just because
they have the body size of an adult, can rob them of nutrients that their
body still requires to build good bones, teeth, muscles, coats, etc.  So
consider your breed of dog and nutritionally treat a puppy like a
puppy until it has reached the adult maintenance stage of life regardless
of its body size.
(2) The maintenance years
When the dog has developed to the adult stage of life it should be placed
on a maintenance diet that will supply its dietary requirements under
normal living conditions.  This period could be called the "carefree
years for feeding" for the average dog owner.  The feeding times can be
reduced to once daily and the amount should remain constant.  Problems
are few but normally arise from either a change of diet or the owner
killing the dog through ignorance (but with love ) by giving it unhealthy
treats such as table scraps, cookies, etc.   We should remember that the
maintenance years are just what the words say; they are a time to
maintain a steady dietary program.
41
(3) Pregnant Bitches
In the first two trimesters of pregnancy, a bitch's nutritional requirements
change very little and she should be maintained on her normal
maintenance diet.  However, in the third trimester her needs change
dramatically and I recommend the following adjustments in her daily
dietary program:  Begin to feed her more frequently, but decrease the
amount of food given at each feeding.  Increase the carbohydrate content
of the food by about one-third while keeping the protein content at the
same level.  This can be done by putting her on a combination of her
regular maintenance food and the same food that you will be feeding the
puppies when they arrive.  Most commercial puppy food is also higher
in the vitamins and minerals that can be passed on to the puppies that are
developing in her womb.  If you use a supplement, increase her vitamin
and mineral supplementation by 50%.  Do not imbalance her system
with additional calcium or any other single mineral.  The balance of
minerals is very important during this time both for the mother and the
puppies.  Continue with these changes until the puppies are weaned.
After the puppies are weaned and her milk supply dries up, return the
bitch to her standard maintenance dietary program.
(4) Older Dogs
Just as some breeds develop slower and need to be kept on a puppy
formula longer, there are some breeds that reach the geriatric stage of
life at later or earlier times than the average breed.  When your dog
reaches this stage, it becomes more difficult for it to convert protein to
energy and they are normally not as active.  Therefore, the protein
amount in its daily food intake should be lower and the proportions of
carbohydrates should be higher.  Dogs reaching the geriatric stage also
should be returned to the puppy feeding schedule.  By changing their
food to a high carbohydrate low protein blend, by increasing their
feeding schedule to more than once daily, and by giving them smaller
quantities of food at each feeding, you can prolong their life and make
it more enjoyable.
(5) Nutritional changes due to stress and other factors
Often we create stress situations for our dogs without realizing it.  At
these times of stress the nutritional requirements can change dramatically
in many ways.  Two of these changes would be burning calories at a
different rate and losing excessive amounts of body waters.  Therefore,
we must be aware of the types of situations that can cause stress in our
dogs and be prepared to help them nutritionally through these times.  An
obvious stress situation would include the time of gestation and lactation
for a bitch, with the birthing adding still more stress on her for that
42
 special time.  However, other times of stress can be caused by a visit to
the vet, entering a dog show, schooling, hunting or even vacation travel.
Not all times of relaxation for the dogs owner are times of relaxation for
our pets.  Dogs can experience stress any time their normal routine is
changed.  Also, like humans, different individuals will handle the stress
differently.  During these times of stress there are a few simple
nutritional rules to follow.  First be sure they have access to a good
supply of water and do not over feed them with high protein foods.
Remember that it is more work for their system to convert protein into
energy than it is to convert carbohydrates.  Therefore you should
increase the carbohydrate % in the daily food intake.  This can be done
by giving them treats such as baked potatoes, pancakes, or rice cakes,
during the hunt or on the way to the show, etc.  Remember different
breeds can assimilate carbohydrates from different sources at different
rates.  Therefore, you need to give the source of carbohydrate that is best
for the dog you are feeding.
Here I also caution you about supplementation.  If you are going to
replace the B vitamins (known as "the stress vitamins") during this time,
be sure you follow the six steps listed in the chapter on supplementation.
Also remember that the association between the B vitamins and the
other nutrients is critical.  Therefore, you should deal with the stress
vitamins as a part of a nutritional team and not create nutritional stress
by supplementing the B vitamins alone.
43
Each breed of dog has
physical or temeramental characteristics
that are different from any other breed.
The question is
NOT IF those characteristics affect
a breed's nutritional requirements
BUT HOW MUCH do they affect a
breed's nutritional requirements?
WE SHOULD KNOW:
Some ailments are genetically passed on
and are not common to all the different breeds.
&
Because the ailments have a direct effect
on the dogs nutritional requirements
these ailments make that breed's
nutritional requirements different
from all other breeds.
44
A HOME HEALTH CHECK
FOR SYMPTOMS OF
NUTRITIONAL PROBLEMS
You can tell whether your dog is getting good nutrition, IF you know
what to look for.   When you see the exterior results of good nutrition,
you can be confident that the internal organs and systems are also
healthy.   Good nutrition helps your dog resist infections and disease so
that it can live a longer, more productive life.
EYE COLOR
(membrane under lower lid)
Indicates proper assimilation of - Iron and other minerals
If poor - light or white in color
If good - darker in color (pink to red)
GUMS AND MOUTH TISSUE
(color and firmness)
Indicates proper assimilation of - Vitamins, minerals and amino
acids
If poor - loose on teeth, bleeding, light color, white spots
If good - firm on teeth, no bleeding when rubbed, darker color
SKIN CONDITION
Indicates proper assimilation of - Protein and fatty acids
If poor - dry, flaky, or can develop "hot spots"
If good - smooth and pliable
45
SKIN CONDITION
Indicates proper amounts of fluids
If poor - hangs on body, is not pliable
If good - returns to body shape when pulled away
COAT CONDITION
Indicates proper assimilation of - Protein and fatty acids
If poor - dry, brittle, dull in color
If good - soft, glossy, bright color
ENERGY LEVEL
Indicates proper assimilation of - Vitamins and Minerals
If poor -  listless and tires easily
If good -  more energetic
or
If poor -  nervous to "hyper"
If good -  calmer and less nervous
MUSCLE TONE
Indicates proper assimilation of - Vitamins, minerals
and trace minerals
If poor - cramping after prolonged or strenuous exercise
If good - reduced muscle cramping from strenuous exercise
A note of caution:  Please do not rely on nutritional home remedies for
your dog if your dog needs the attention of a veterinarian.
46
A PRODUCT FORMULATED FOR THE
NUTRITIONALLY AVERAGE DOG
We can calculate the statistical average weight of all dogs in the country
(46.7 pounds) or the statistical average height of all the dogs in the
country (16.5 inches).  Would the averaged sized dog also be the
nutritionally average dog?  Which single breed of dog represents the
average size of all breeds?
Dogs' body weights range from 1 pound to 235 pounds, with a height
range of 5 inches to 35 inches.  Their coats range from long to short,
smooth to coarse, single to double - in every imaginable color.  Their
dispositions range from the hyper active and nervous to the laid back and
listless.  Not all breeds suffer from all the same ailments.  The list of
ailments the different breeds can suffer from includes: Hot Spots, Bloat,
Dysplasia, respiratory problems, Hyper Thyroid, Hypo Thyroid,
Progressive Retinal Atrophy, Heart Failure, Worms, Cataracts, Snow
Nose, Eczema, Dwarfism, Hemophilia, Kidney Failure, Liver Failure,
Torsion, Enclampsia, Cyst, Black Tongue, Slipped Stifle, Temperature
Sensitive, Monorchidism, Dermoid Sinus, tumors, Collie Eye, Von
Willebrand's Disease, etc.
Since there are so many differences among the many breeds, which one
breed accurately represents the average of all the other breeds?  Could
we claim that the nutritionally average breed is:  (1) A Labrador
Retriever, which is only one of the few breeds known to produce skin
oils and not skin dander like most other breeds?  (2) A Collie that needs
ten times the amount of vitamin D than other breeds?  (3) A Beagle that
has a different requirement for vitamin A than other breeds?  When
commercial manufacturers of all-breed dog foods test their products,
which breed should they use?  Obviously, whatever breed they use, that
breed is not going to be the nutritionally average breed of dog.  It will
not be a good representative for all the other breeds.  The nutritionally
average breed of dog does not exist!
Testing a dog food formula on one breed, cannot develop a product that
will meet the nutritional needs for all the different breeds.  Developing
all-breed dog foods by selective testing with only one breed would be
the same as developing an all-breed dog grooming product after doing
research on only a hairless breed.  Even after testing the product on ten
breeds that shed their coats, we should not expect the product to be
correct for breeds that do not shed.
47
The different breeds of dogs all have genetic differences. One
genetic difference is: they  all  have different nutritional requirements.
The nutritional requirements of the many breeds are so varied that no
one single all-breed dog food can satisfy all their needs, or can even be
considered safe for all the different breeds.  I calculate the odds of an
all-breed dog food being NUTRITIONALLY CORRECT for any
single breed of dog at less than one-one thousandths of one percent.
In the United States there are many all breed dog food companies
collectively producing hundreds of different dog food formulas at any
one time.  Each of these companies is telling us that the formula they
have is good for our breed of dog.  Then they keep changing their
formulas, looking for the ideal all-breed food.  They can stop looking
for this ideal all-breed food blend since it will never be found.  They
might as well take the next one hundred thousand years and devote their
research laboratories to developing a nutritionally average dog.
All-breed dog foods cannot provide what all the different dogs need.
However, they do provide dog owners with what they want.  As dog
owners we want to be able to go to the store and get a prepackaged food
that is easy to put into the dog's dish and won't take up much room in
the garage.  We want a product that will produce a small firm stool and
is easy to clean up.  We want it to be CONVENIENT.  Because this is
what we want, this is what commercial all breed dog food companies
give us.
Commercial dog food companies can give us both what we want
and also what our dogs need TODAY!  To do this, all they have to do
is focus on a specific segment of the market instead of trying to cover
it all with a single product.  Ideally it would be best if they provided us
with breed specific dog foods.  It is my hope, that in the future, some
large dog food company will come through and do the job right by
providing foods formulated to the needs of the dogs eating them.
For the commercial dog food companies to provide both what we want
and what our dogs need, we must be willing to pay the price.  Both
manufacturing and marketing costs would increase.  We also would
need to be willing to give up some of the convenience present marketing
methods provide.  We know that dog food should be breed specific.
Until we are willing to pay the higher price for what we know to be
correct, our dogs will continue to pay the price of their life for our
convenience.
48
THE HOME COOKING
ALTERNATIVE
In Grandma’s day, just eighty-five years ago, there were fl() commercial
dog foods for her to buy. Having no choice she had to cook for her pets.
Today we can buy a can or bag of dog food or do it the way Grandma
had to. Home cooking will always be harder than throwing a bag of
pet food into a cart, yet a growing number of people today take time
to cook for pets; justifying it by claiming it’s out of love, a desire to
provide a healthier diet, or to save money. They have found that
cocking for a single pet or a full kennel can take less than two hours
per week. The equipment needed is found in the average kitchen and
a beginning level cook has the skill.
Home-cooked dog food can be prepared free of harmful additives.
The preservatives BHA and BHT can cause epilepsy in dogs
(Washington State University studies). Ethoxyquin produces kidney
and liver disorders (Hazelton Laboratories study). The government’s
National Research Council shows that even the antioxidant vitamin C,
used as a preservative in many commercial dog foods, can cause
kidney and liver problems in dogs. As I have said elsewhere, vitamin
C may be a good preservative to use in human food but harmful for
most dogs. The Morris Animal Foundation claims that kidney and
liver disorders now rank as the second and sixth highest causes of
household pet death in the U.S. Additives are found in dog foods to
keep them looking good or to preserve them so they won’t turn rancid
while sitting in a warehouse or at the retailers. Few pet owners would
argue with the fact that a pet’s diet would be healthier if it was made
without any additives.
Cooking a dog’s food can even be cost efficient. For an eye opening
cost comparison let’s use figures supplied by the dog food industry.
In 1995 they claimed the average dog in this country weighed 46
pounds and would consume $248.00 of commercial dog food that
year. Choosing a common commercial product (one sold in most
grocery stores), reading that foods ingredient listing, and following
the food’s feeding instructions, we see that average 46 pound dog
could be fed 3112 cups per day of a food containing the following
ingredients: chicken, wheat, corn gluten meal, poultry by-products
(which may be hydrolyzed feathers, or feet and heads), beef tallow,
rice, dried whey, vitamins, minerals, BHA and Ethoxyquin.
49
50
To cook for the same “average dog,” its owner would place the
following into a large pan:
•  two pounds chopped chicken meat - 79¢ /lb,
•  one package frozen corn (ground into a tine pulp) - 59¢,
•  one pound beef tallow (or 1/2 cup of cooking oil) - 74¢/lb.
Mix, bake for one hour at 35&, cool, and break into small pieces. To
the juices add:
•  fourteen finely chopped slices whole wheat bread - 25¢,
•  4 cups cooked rice - 35¢,
•  1/8th pound of shredded cheese - 65¢.
Mix all ingredients together, divide into seven reusable containers
add: • seven pet formula multi-vitamin/mineral tablets (one in
container) - 48¢ Refrigerate.
These seven ready-to-serve home cooked meals for the ‘average~
pound dog are made with the same ingredients as those ii commercial
food, except for the hydrolyzed feathers and preservatives The home-
cooked food will cost $4.64 for a one week supply. T~ less than the
cost of a commercial food (divide their $248.00 by 52 weeks).
Preparing home-cooked meals, because we care about our pet's
health, can also save us money.
Home-cooking allows us to prepare foods to meet a specific nutritional
needs. We know that commercial foods sold for all can not possibly
meet the needs of each individual member of the canine family. Two
dogs of the same breed can even have different nutritional requirements.
A dog’s temperament will affect its nutritional requirements. Two
dogs of the same breed may look alike, yet one be active and one a
permanent rug decoration. The two will have different nutritional
requirements. Preparing separate recipes for these two based on their
individual nutritional needs would be better for the health of each one.
Dog owners today have a choice that was not even available just 85
years ago. Today you can choose to provide preservative-free
customized to each dog's individual needs, or the preservative blends
of an “any-dog” formula. You can serve healthy home-cooking or
feed a repetitive diet of commercial fast-foods meals.
51
PLEASE REMEMBER:
Do not use my one recipe for all dogs. Just as a commercial food
should not be sold for all breeds, the recipe I show in this chapter
should not be fed to all breeds.
You should take into consideration where the breed you are feeding
originated and limit the recipe ingredients to those found in that
breed’s native environment. i.e., Since there are NO rice paddies in
the Nordic Tundra, dogs from that environment should not be fed rice.
I have listed the nutrient sources I recommend for each breed in the
Breed by Breed section of this book.
If you try to develop a recipe for your dog, based on the recipe in this
chapter, you should substitute the correct food sources and adjust the
portions according to the weight of the breed you are dealing with.
You should also adjust your recipe according to any protein /
carbohydrate I fiber directions given in the Breed by Breed section.
Each breed of dog has
physical or temeramental characteristics
that are different from any other breed.
The question is
NOT IF those characteristics affect
a breed's nutritional requirements
BUT HOW MUCH do they affect a
breed's nutritional requirements?
BREED BY BREED
INTRODUCTION
In the following Breed By Breed chapters I recommend what I feel are
the best foods for each breed of dog.  Today we must choose from the dog
foods that are presently available.  Therefore, I have made my breed by
breed recommendations based on the commercial food available at this
time.  I hope these recommendations will assist you in making an
intelligent breed specific selection from the all-breed foods available.
For these recommendations I have taken the following factors into
consideration:  (1) the nutritional history of each breed, (2) the nutrients
of each breed's native environment, (3) * the nutrients presently found
in commercial dog foods, and (4) the nutrients that would be foreign to
a dog's system and cause it nutritional distress.
*I recommend ingredients that can be found in different commercial dog
foods rather than recommend a brand of food for your dog.  I used to
make recommendations for specific brands of dog food for specific
breeds.  However, I have stopped doing this because most dog food
companies keep changing their formulas in search of that "ideal" all-
breed dog food.
For example, recommending a specific brand of dog food can cause
problems.  I recommended a specific brand of food to the owner of a
kennel of Bichon Frise.  She fed her dogs the food I recommended and
was happy with the results.  A short time later the dog food company
changed the sources of the minerals in their product.  This change was
noted in fine print under "ingredients", but essentially the label on the
products bag continued to look the same.  Since they only changed the
source and not the amount of the minerals, the change went unnoticed by
the buyer.  Her dogs then developed kidney stones on the food that was
named the same  and looked the same . . . . but was not the same  as the
food I had recommended.
I also hope that my requiring you to read the labels on dog food products
will result in your developing the habit of reading the entire  label each
time you buy dog food.  This practice will improve your chances of
detecting a formula change in your dog's food.
55
57
Weight Standards: m/f - 7 to 8 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - under 10.25 inches
Coat: wiry, shaggy, in black, tan, wheaton or red
Common Ailments: slipped stifle and fractures
The Affenpinscher developed in the lowland farm area of Germany
prior to the 15th century.  It has a facial appearance similar to a monkey,
and the literal translation of the German word Affenpinscher is "monkey
terrier."  This breed of dog is very quick afoot and at one time earned its
keep as an effective stable yard ratter.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been rodents (rats, mice
and other small ground animals), poultry, and farmland grains of wheat,
corn and barley or alfalfa with ground vegetables of potatoes, carrots
and cabbage.
For the Affenpinscher I recommend foods that are high in their
carbohydrate content from potatoes and barley.  The meat protein
source should be a blend of horse meat and poultry.  I also recommend
that you avoid feeding any foods containing soy, beet pulp, white rice,
fish meal or lamb to an Affenpinscher.
AFFENPINSCHER
AFGHAN HOUND
58
Weight Standards: m - 60 lbs., f - 50 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 27 inches, f - 25 inches
Coat: double, long top coat, soft textured, in any color
Common Ailments: cataracts, dysplasia, rashes, urinary problems
The Afghan, a sight hound, developed as a hunting dog in the Balkh,
Barakzai, and Kurram valley areas of ancient Egypt, known now as
Afghanistan.  The earliest records of the Afghan date back some 8000
years ago to this area of ancient Egypt.  These records show that they
were used to hunt such animals as mountain deer, plains antelopes,
hares, wolves, and snow leopards.
Native food supplies for this breed would have included the mountain
deer, plains antelopes, hare, wolves, snow leopards, fox, and fowl.  The
Balkh, Barakzai, and Kurram valley areas also provided grain crops
such as wheat, corn, barley, and brown rice.  There was a form of beef
cattle in this area.  However, the prevalent religions forbid the use of
beef as a food source for humans and dogs alike.  Therefore, I feel it is
unlikely that the Afghan was exposed to this form of meat.
For the Afghan hound I recommend foods with a high fiber, high
carbohydrate percentage.  The protein should be from sources of poultry
and lamb, the carbohydrates from brown rice and wheat.  For this breed
I recommend you avoid foods based on soy, beet pulp, horse meat, or
beef and their by-products.
AIREDALE TERRIER
59
Weight Standards: m - 50 to 60 lbs., f - 45 to 55 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 23 inches, f - 22 inches
Coat: short and wiry in black or saddle with tan extremities
Common Ailments: can be hyperactive and develop skin rashes
The Airedale Terrier developed in Yorkshire County England.  The
human inhabitants of this area used this breed to control the otter
population in order to improve the fishing.  This developed a breed that,
still today, is very much a water dog.  An amusing Airedale trait is that
they will dive under the water in pursuit of prey, a type of action that is
very rare for any other breed.
A special note; The Airedale Terrier seems to develop more skin and
coat problems when taken to live in arid desert climates.  These
problems can be corrected by feeding that Airedale a diet with higher
amounts of the fatty acids.
Native food supplies found in Yorkshire County would have been meats
from deer, boar, otter, and fresh water stream fish.  Also vegetables of
the low ground type were prevalent, such as carrots, potatoes, and
cabbage.
For the Airedale I recommend foods with starch from potato and meat
from beef.  The food should be high in fiber content from sources such
as wheat and oats.  However, I also recommend you avoid feeding white
rice, beet pulp, or soy to the Airedale terrier.
AKITA
60
Weight Standards: m - 85 to 100 lbs., f - 75 to 85 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 26 to 28 inches, f - 24 to 26 inches
Coat: short and straight, harsh textured in any color
Common Ailments: dysplasia
The Akita developed as a hunting dog in the Japanese prefectures of
Gifu, Nagano, and Toyama.  At one time its ownership was restricted to
the nobility, who used the breed to hunt large game such as wild boar and
deer.  It was also used in the blood sport of dog fighting.  Today, they
are used as police and guard dogs, guide dogs for the blind, and as pets.
The main meat sources in the Akita's native environment were bear,
deer, wild boar, and fish. Rice was the main carbohydrate source of the
area and vegetables were greens such as beans, cabbage, and tuber roots
much like our sweet potato.
For the Akita, I think the best blend of protein available from commercial
dog foods would contain poultry, fish, rice and wheat.  For this breed I
also recommend adding about 1 to 2 teaspoons of canned white Tuna
daily to the commercial foods.  Akita owners can also make sure their
dogs receive a fat-carbohydrate-protein balance similar to the breed's
native diet by using a commercial puppy formula for the breed's entire
life span.  Akita owners should avoid feeding any dog food containing
yellow corn, beet pulp, beef or horse meats.
61
Weight Standards: m - 85 lbs., f - 75 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 25 inches, f - 23 inches
Coat: dense in texture, straight with a long top coat
Common Ailments: dwarfism, dysplasia, pigmentation
The Alaskan Malamute developed in the northern reaches of the area
we now know as the state of Alaska.  Named for an Inuit tribe from this
area, the Alaskan Malamute tracked large game and served as a pack and
sled dog.  In camp it doubled as a family pet and guard dog, even serving
as a nanny to the Inuit children.
This breed originated in an area where the primary food sources were
whale, salmon, halibut, and seal.  None of today's commercial all-breed
dog foods contain those sources prevalent in the original diet of the
Alaskan Malamute.
However, there are commercial foods that closely match the amino acid
profile of the Alaskan Malamute's natural diet. These foods would have
a combination of poultry, fish, lamb and rice in its protein base.   These
food sources are also high in minerals and natural occurring oils and thus
would be the ideal base diet for this breed.  The worst food blend for the
Alaskan Malamute would contain a base of soy,  beef or beef by-
products, beet pulp and yellow corn.
ALASKAN  MALAMUTE
62
Weight Standards: m - 27 lbs., f - 25 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 15 inches, f - 14 inches
Coat: soft, long and wavy topcoat. thick undercoat,
 in solid colors or parti-colored
Common Ailments: PRA, hemophilia, slipped stifle,
digestive disorders, cataracts, and ear problems
The American Cocker Spaniel originated in America from selective
English Cocker Spaniel breeding stock.  In America the American
Cocker Spaniel is often called by the nicknames "Cocker Spaniel" or
"Cocker" while the English Cocker Spaniel is referred to by its full
registered name.  In England the reverse is true.
This Cocker Spaniel retains many of the same nutritional requirements
as the English Cocker Spaniel.  However, the American Cocker Spaniel
does not need a high carbohydrate diet like the English Cocker Spaniel,
which remains exposed to a diet containing large quantities of
carbohydrates from sources such as the potato.  Yet the American
Cocker must have a higher amount of the amino acid Lysine in its food
than the English Cocker Spaniel.
For the American Cocker Spaniel I recommend a food blend of corn,
wheat, poultry, and dairy products. Also a blend of food sources
containing low carbohydrates and an average fat content. Conversely,
I feel the worst blend for this breed of Cocker Spaniel would contain
fish, white rice, horse meat, or soy.
AMERICAN COCKER SPANIEL
63
Height Standards: two classes: Miniature; m - 12 to 15 inches,
f - 11 to 14 inches, Standard; 15 to 19 inches, f - 14 to 18 inches
Coat: solid white, double, with very thick under coat and top coat
Common Ailments: hot spots, coat pigmentation problems
The American Eskimo did not develop in America at all.  It can trace
its history back over 6000 years to its origins as a member of the Nordic
Spitz   family of dog.
A heavy year around shedder this breed requires a finely balanced diet
to grow and maintain the thick and outstanding coat that is this breed's
trademark.  Also the amount of coat that this breed has is equal to many
breeds of dog with a total weight of two to three times the American
Eskimo's total weight.  Therefore, when considering the nutritional
requirements of this breed, one can readily see that nutrients related to
the production of coat hair are going to be in high demand.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been those found in the
Nordic Tundra.  These would have included fish, seal, caribou, reindeer,
and vegetables that could grow in this environment's short growing
season.
For the American Eskimo I recommend foods that contain a blend of
fish, poultry, horse meat, wheat, and potato.  However, I feel you should
avoid feeding a food containing white or brown rice, avocado, citrus,
soy, or lamb to this breed of dog.
AMERICAN ESKIMO
64
Weight Standards: m - 65 to 75 lbs., f - 60 - 70 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 22 to 25 inches, f - 21 to 24 inches
Coat: short, single, hard, black with brown and tan or tan and white
Common Ailments: a very hardy breed
The American Foxhound developed in the Southeastern area of the   U.
S. A.  It has not always been used as a scent hound to hunt the fox.  There
are diary accounts claiming this breed was used to hunt Indians rather
than fox or hare.  These accounts were written by DeSoto's retainers
when this Spanish explorer was in the Carolinas during the early 1500's.
This is a breed with a well documented history.  For example, we can
trace a single family of this hound back three hundred years to the
specific date of 1650.
Native meat supplies for this breed would have been the small game
animals found in the Carolina countryside, such as the fox, raccoon, and
squirrel.  The crops of this area consisted of corn, wheat, beets, beans
(soy), and rice.
For the American Foxhound I recommend foods that contain a blend of
beef, soy, wheat, rice and corn.  However, the foods you should avoid
feeding an American Foxhound are those containing fish meal, poultry
or lamb.
AMERICAN FOXHOUND
65
Weight Standards: m - 55 to 70 lbs., f - 40 to 55 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 18 to 19 inches, f - 17 to 18 inches
Coat: short, smooth, single in a variety of colors
Common Ailments: dysplasia, heart  & respiratory problems, bloat
The American Pit Bull Terrier  / American Staffordshire Terrier
developed in the area now known as Florida, U.S.A.  Selected stock of
the Staffordshire Bull Terrier were imported from England for their
development. This breed has been known by a series of names:
AMERICAN PIT BULL TERRIER (UKC-1898), Yankee Terrier, Pit
Bull Terrier, Half and Half, and American Bull Terrier.  The American
Kennel Club first accepted this breed in 1935 as the AMERICAN
STAFFORDSHIRE TERRIER.  This breed has been used for dog
fighting and, if trained for that purpose, is very good at it.  However, if
it is not trained to be a warrior, it can make a good house pet, is very good
with children, and is a warm and loving companion.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been the crops and meats
of colonial Florida.  These included yellow corn, soy meal, rice,
venison, and fish.
For this breed I recommend foods that contain soy, corn, brown rice,
beef, and poultry.  However, since this breed needs a high fiber - low
carbohydrate diet, you should avoid feeding a food with a high fat or
starch content.
AMERICAN PIT BULL TERRIER (UKC)
AMERICAN STAFFORDSHIRE TERRIER (AKC)
AMERICAN WATER SPANIEL
66
Weight Standards: m - 28 to 45 lbs., f - 25 to 45 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 15 to 18 inches
Coat: short, curly, chocolate
Common Ailments: hot spots (hair loss and dry coat)
It is believed the American Water Spaniel developed in the Northeastern
part of the U.S.A. However, this cannot be confirmed and many of the
first written reports about this breed came from sportsmen in the
Midwestern states.  It is a very good water retriever and uses a unique
swimming motion like a seal.  It is one of the few breeds that does not
produce skin dander.  This makes it ideal for people who have allergies
to dogs' skin dander.  This breed is one of the few breeds known to
produce a skin oil.  This gives the breed a requirement for higher
amounts of the fatty acids than most other breeds.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been those found from
the Midwestern to Northeastern U.S.  These included yellow corn,
wheat, water fowl, and fresh water fish.
For the American Water Spaniel, I recommend foods containing a blend
of poultry, lamb, fish meal, wheat, and corn.  I also recommend you
avoid feeding this breed a food that contains white rice, soy, beet pulp,
or horse meat.
67
Weight Standards: m - average 100 lbs., f - average 80 lbs.
Height Standards: m - over 29 inches, f - under 27 inches
Coat: short and smooth, in buff, white, black or even tricolor
Common Ailments: hot spots and body rashes
The Anatolian Shepherd developed in the mountains of Turkey.  It is
a fiercely loyal guard dog and is still used to protect the flocks in its
native land.  Its size can be intimidating and yet it is known to be warm
and loving to children.
It is known to blow its coat annually and its nutritional requirements can
change during this time.  For example, their requirement for protein and
fat increases while the lost coat is being replaced.
Food supplies found in this breed's native area of Turkey would have
included lamb, poultry, and brown rice.  Any oils would have been from
sources like olives or avocados.
For the Anatolian Shepherd I recommend foods made with lamb, brown
rice, and poultry.  The food should be high in the fatty acids from
vegetable sources such as the avocado.  I also feel you should avoid
feeding this breed a food that contains beef, horse meat, white rice,
potato, soy or beet pulp.
ANATOLIAN SHEPHERD
68
Weight Standards: m/f - 40 to 45 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 18 to 19 inches
Coat: dense in texture, black with tan and white speckle
Common Ailments: dysplasia, hot spots and skin rashes
The Australian Cattle Dog developed in Australia in the early 1800's.
This breed can trace its heritage back to being a direct descendant of four
specific breeds: the Dingo, the Blue Merle Highland Collie, the Dalmatian
and the Black and Tan Kelpie.  It originally herded cattle in the rough
outback of Australia.  Here it developed not only its nutritional
requirements but its legendary stamina and endurance.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been those found in the
Australian outback (a high desert environment) and would have included
ground vegetables, wheat, oats and meats from beef, rabbit, and kangaroo.
A special note concerning the meats; all the meats from this area have
a very low fat to muscle ratio.
For the Australian Cattle dog I recommend low fat / high fiber foods
with a blend of beef, corn, and wheat.  I also recommend that you avoid
feeding an Australian Cattle dog any soy, white rice, beet pulp, poultry
or fish.
AUSTRALIAN CATTLE DOG
69
Weight Standards: m/f - 12 lbs. to 14 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 10 inches
Coat: harsh textured & straight, colors of blue & tan or sandy red
Common Ailments:  very hardy with few ailments reported
The Australian Terrier developed in the mountain foothills of Australia
as both a ratter and a watchdog at the mines.  The Australian Terrier
performs both of these functions well.  It is a relatively new breed of dog
that was created by crossbreeding several different terrier breeds.  One
distinguishing feature of the Australian Terrier is its topknot, which may
indicate it has relatives in common with the Dandie Dinmont Terrier.
This is a very easy breed to keep in a small apartment or a confined area.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been rodents, poultry,
and mutton with grains of wheat or barley found in Australian foothills.
For the Australian Terrier I recommend foods that contain horse meat,
poultry, lamb, and wheat.  However, I feel you should avoid feeding this
Terrier any high carbohydrate foods or food containing soy or ocean fish
protein.
AUSTRALIAN TERRIER
70
Weight Standards: m - 25 lbs., f - 23 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 17 inches, f - 16 inches
Coat: short, silky smooth, single in tan, black or red with white
Common Ailments: congenital hemolytic anemia,  hyperactive
The Basenji developed in Central Africa as a sight hunter.  It is not a
mute dog, yet it is known as the "barkless dog."  The sound that the
Basenji makes is somewhere between a chortle and a yodel.  In their
native Africa they hunt small game by pointing, holding, and then upon
command, driving the game into a net after the hunter is in position.
They are also used as retrievers for the game that takes flight.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been the African desert
partridge and rabbit combined with a local form of the grains wheat and
rice.  Another staple of their diet would have been a tuber root that is very
similar to the peanut.
For the Basenji I recommend foods that contain their protein from beef
and horse meats blended with poultry.  The carbohydrate sources should
be from brown rice and wheat.  However, you should avoid feeding a
Basenji any foods containing soy, beet pulp, fish, lamb or white rice.
BASENJI
71
Weight Standards: m/f - average 50 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - under 15 inches
Coat: short and smooth in brown or red with white
Common Ailments: respiratory problems (snore) and an overeater
The Basset Hound developed in France.  Basset is the French word
meaning "low set" and for a breed that weighs about 50 pounds they are
very  low set.  They may appear to be overweight due to a loose coat that
will hang in folds on their body.  However, I must point out that this
breed does not normally have a body weight problem.  The first Basset
hounds in this country appeared after the American Revolution when
Lafayette presented them as a gift of state to George Washington.  The
Basset has a very keen sense of smell.  Their long low set ears also help
cup the scent during a hunt. Their short legs can cover an amazing
amount of ground in a short time and, therefore, they can hunt game such
as the fleet rabbit or deer.
Native meat supplies for this breed would have been venison, rabbit,
mutton, and poultry.  The farm crops were wheat, corn, and beets.
For the Basset Hound I recommend foods with poultry, lamb, wheat and
corn.  However, you should avoid feeding a Basset Hound any soy meal,
horse meat, beef or its by-products, fish or white rice.
BASSET HOUND
72
Weight Standards: two classes m/f  - 13" and under -
15 to 20 lbs., 13" to 15" - 20 to 30 lbs.
Height Standards: two classes m/f - 13" and under
and over 13" but not exceeding 15"
Coat: short, smooth textured, in black with white and tan
Common Ailments: A very hardy breed with few ailments
The Beagle is a very active scent hound that originated in England.  It
is one of the oldest pure-bred breeds known, with a written history that
dates from a time before the Norman Invasion of England in 1066.  The
Celtic tribesmen who hunted with this breed also named it.  The Beagle's
name comes from the Celtic word beag  meaning "small."
I note that when hunting, the Beagle requires high carbohydrate snacks.
The Beagle burns calories at an exceptional rate during times of stress
or work.  Like other breeds, they are unable to store the carbohydrate to
burn for this energy and a heavy demand on their protein energy stores
can cause muscle cramping.  The Beagle also will require larger intakes
of water during times of stress or work.
The Beagle originated in an area of England where its primary food
sources would have been beets, potatoes, mutton, wheat, corn, rabbit,
and poultry.  Thus a blend of these foods, which are high in carbohydrates
and have a high fat to protein ratio, would be the ideal base diet for the
Beagle.  Conversely, the worst blend would contain fish, rice, beef or
beef by-products, horse meat, or soy.
BEAGLE
73
Weight Standards: m/f - average 50 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 22 inches
Coat: medium length double coated with a very soft top coat
Common Ailments: dysplasia, skin rashes, hot spots
and other skin and coat problems
The Bearded Collie developed in the southern mainland of Scotland in
the 1700's.  For centuries it has worked as the Scottish Highlanders' able
assistant, both as a drover and as a sheepdog.
A special note: Breeders have confirmed that this breed's requirement
for minerals, which it can assimilate, is very different from the rough or
smooth coated Collies.  i.e.. The wrong source of the mineral calcium
can cause kidney stones.  Therefore, I recommend that any dietary
calcium for this breed be from bone meal, and that you avoid dolomite
or oyster shell forms.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been those found in the
southern mainland of Scotland.  These included mutton, goat, poultry,
and low ground vegetable crops of potatoes, cabbage, and carrots.
For the Bearded Collie, I recommend foods low in fat that have a blend
of poultry, lamb, wheat, and potato.  However, you should avoid feeding
a blend of soy, fish yellow corn, and horse meat or its by-products to a
Bearded Collie.
BEARDED COLLIE
BEDLINGTON TERRIER
74
Weight Standards: m/f - 17 to 23 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 16.5 inches, f - 15.5 inches
Coat: coarse, short and curly, needs to be stripped
Common Ailments: PRA and other eye problems, liver
and kidney disorders, hyper thyroid
The Bedlington Terrier developed in the area of Rothbury, England.
It hunted otter, coursed rabbit, and worked as a pit fighter.  In the NRC
Nutrient Requirements of Dogs , the Bedlington Terrier was one breed
used in the testing of copper requirements.  Copper is needed to form red
blood cells in all dogs.  These tests showed that this breed has copper
requirements that are totally unique and very low.  Yet, I stress the
importance of providing copper to the Bedlington.  I also stress that the
Bedlington's copper be balanced to other nutritional team members as
outlined in the chapter "Nutritional Teams."  For this breed, the copper
should not be from a sulfate source.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been otter, fresh water
fish, rodents, oats, and wheat, - such as those found in the area of
Rothbury, England.
For the Bedlington I recommend foods that are a blend of horse meat and
fish with wheat and oats.  I also recommend that you avoid feeding a
food with soy, lamb, white rice or yellow corn to this breed.
BELGIAN MALINOIS
75
Weight Standards: m - 65 to 75 lbs., f - 55 to 65 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 24 to 26 inches, f - 22 to 24 inches
Coat: short and straight in light tricolors
Common Ailments: the hardiest of the Belgian herding breeds
The Belgian Malinois developed near the city of Malines, Belgium,
which is a northern city close to the border of the Netherlands and North
Sea.  Often this breed is called the short coated Belgian Tervuren.  Yet
these two breeds are very different.   The Belgian Malinois has a
requirement for less fiber in its diet than the other Belgium herding
breeds.  Its requirement for minerals is also unique.  The Malinois can
best use mineral sources associated with a coastal environment rather
than those found in the environment of Laeken, which would be the
native environment of the Tervuren.
Native food supplies for the Belgium Malinois breed would have been
associated with the sea foods of the North Sea.  The Maline's area also
provided goat, poultry, cabbage, and wheat.
For the Belgian Malinois I recommend foods that are low in fiber and
have protein from poultry, ocean fish, and wheat.  You should avoid
feeding the Mal any soy, beet pulp (good for the Tervuren), horse meat
or beef.
BELGIAN SHEEPDOG
76
Weight Standards: m - 65 to 75 lbs., f - 55 to 65 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 24 to 26 inches, f - 22 to 24 inches
Coat: solid black, straight and long
with an undercoat that gives it a dense appearance
Common Ailments: liver and kidney disorders
The Belgian Sheepdog developed in the city of Groenendael, Belgium.
This city is on the border of Luxembourg and is nestled in the foothills
of that country's Alpine Mountains.  In most of the world this breed is
called the "Groenendael" and it is only in America that it is called the
"Belgian Sheepdog."  They are very intelligent and have been used
throughout Europe for police work.  They make great pets since they are
very faithful companions and loyal watchdogs.
When properly fed, this breed's solid black coat is beautiful.  However,
when fed protein with a low amount of the amino acid Phenylalanine,
its coat can lose its pigmentation and that beautiful black color can turn
to a dull orange.
Native food supplies for this breed would have included beets, (which
are the main vegetable crop of the area), wheat, mutton, poultry, and a
limited amount of beef.
For the Belgian Sheepdog I recommend  foods from low fat poultry and
high carbohydrate beet, blended with wheat and beef.  You should avoid
feeding a commercial food with soy, fish, yellow corn or horse meat to
this breed.
BELGIAN TERVUREN
77
Weight Standards: m - 65 to 75 lbs., f - 55 to 65 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 24 to 26 inches, f 22 to 24 inches
Coat: long, dense and straight in tricolor
Common Ailments: hot spots and skin rashes
The Belgian Tervuren developed in the Laeken area of Belgium.  The
Laeken area of Belgium is on the border of Germany.  It would have
provided a very different environment than the foothills of the Alps or
the coastal region next to the North Sea where the other two AKC
recognized Belgian herding breeds developed.  This breed is a very
special working dog that earned a place in history during World War I
as a messenger carrier.  One major casualty of the war could have been
the extinction of this breed of dog.  Many of them were lost while
performing their duty in battle.  However, thankfully, after the war
European dog fanciers worked to save this breed from extinction.
Their native environment would have supplied foods including beef,
oats, beets, cabbage, and other leafy greens.  Note: the meats from this
environment all contained a high amount of body fat to muscle ratio.
For the Belgian Tervuren I recommend foods from beef, wheat, beet
pulp, and oats.  These foods should be high in their animal fat content.
Avoid any food that contains soy, fish, corn, white rice or horse meat for
this breed.
BERNESE MOUNTAIN DOG
78
Weight Standards: m - 80 to 105 lbs., f - 75 to 90 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 23 to 27.5 inches, f - 21 to 26 inches
Coat: medium long, flat, soft, wavy topcoat, black with rust & white
Common Ailments: bloat, dysplasia, hot spots
The Bernese Mountain Dog developed in the Bern Region of the Swiss
Alps.  They herded livestock and worked as cart dogs to transport goods
and produce to market.  Due to the high mineral content in the soil and
water supplies of the Bern Region of Switzerland, this breed developed
a need for a unique balance of minerals such as selenium, iron, zinc and
manganese in its diet.
The alpine mountain environment around Bern remained very cold year
round and therefore produced a dog with more body fat than breeds that
developed in warmer climates.  Most animals that could survive the
Bern Valley's alpine environment also had this extra body fat.  Since
these were the animals that formed the meat base of the Bernese
Mountain Dog's noncommercial diet, today's Bernese Mountain Dog
also will do best on food sources with high fat content.  Native foods that
would have been in this breed's diet would have included goats, sheep,
pigs, chicken, and low ground vegetables.
I recommend food that contains a blend of poultry, lamb, and wheat as
the best for this breed.  Avoid foods that contain yellow corn, soy, ocean
fish, beef or horse meat and their by-products.
BICHON FRISE
79
Weight Standards: m/f - 11 to 15 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 8 to 12 inches
Coat: thick, short, double,  white
Common Ailments: skin and ear problems
The Bichon Frise's home port was in the Mediterranean area of what
is now France and Italy.  They became popular world wide by
accompanying the sailors from their home ports around the world and
were used as a trade item.  The name Bichon Frise when translated from
French means curly-coated lapdog, a name that this breed definitely
earned.  The Bichon is one of the few breeds that can assimilate the
minerals that are from sulfate sources.  I credit this unique feature to the
soil from their native environment being primarily limestone with
mineral deposits having molecular forms similar to commercial sulfate
sources.  This is important since the Bichon, like most other breeds of
dog, will develop kidney stones when the dietary minerals are from
sources they cannot assimilate.
The primary food sources of this breed's native environment included
fish, goat, wheat, green vegetables, and carbohydrates of the type found
in pasta.
For this breed of dog I recommend a blend that contains poultry, lamb,
fish, rice, avocado, and wheat.  These should provide the closest amino
acid balance to that required by the Bichon Frise.  Conversely, I feel the
least desirable blend would contain beef or its by-products, with soy and
yellow corn meal.
BLACK AND TAN COONHOUND
80
Weight Standards: m - 80 to 90 lbs., f - 65 to 75 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 26 to 28 inches, f - 23 to 26 inches
Coat: short and smooth in black and tan
Common Ailments: hypo thyroid, skin and coat problems
The Black and Tan Coonhound developed in the Southeastern U.S.A.
(the Carolinas).  It is a scent hound that only gives voice after he has
successfully treed his quarry.  The Black and Tan Coonhound is a very
powerful dog that has the courage required to keep a mountain lion or
bear at bay until the hunter arrives, as well as the quickness and stamina
required to hunt raccoon, and deer.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been the same as for the
early Carolina colonists. This area provided meats from deer, bear, wild
boar, and turkey.  Rice was a larger commercial crop than tobacco or
cotton in the Carolinas  before the Civil War and therefore would have
been a staple of this breed's diet.  The other native vegetable crops of soy
bean and flax are the reasons this breed developed its requirement for
high amounts of dietary vegetable oil.
For the Black and Tan Coonhound I recommend foods that contain lots
of rice blended with beef or horse meat, corn, wheat, and beet pulp.
However, you should avoid feeding a Black and Tan Coonhound any
fish or lamb.
BLOODHOUND
81
Weight Standards: m - 90 to 110 lbs., f - 80 to 100 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 25 to 27 inches, f - 23 to 25 inches
Coat: short and smooth in black or liver with tan
Common Ailments: bloat, thyroid problems
The Bloodhound developed prior to the twelfth century in the vicinity
of Constantinople.  This was a seaport in the country we now know as
Turkey.  They have been blessed with a scenting ability that is unparalleled
by any other breed of dog.  Bloodhounds have a genetic tendency to
hypothyroidism, which is an inability of the thyroid gland to manufacture
sufficient amounts of thyroxine.  Within the thyroid gland iodine
molecules and protein molecules join to make thyroxine.  Therefore,
this process can be helped by providing the proper form of iodine for
their thyroid gland to use.  I feel the best form of iodine for the
Bloodhound is the natural form found in sea kelp, and the worst form is
any one of the artificial isotopes of iodine.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been from their seaport
environment and included ocean fish, pork, goat, wheat, brown rice,
high carbohydrate vegetables, and fruits such as avocado, olive or fig.
For the Bloodhound I recommend food with a blend of wheat, brown
rice, avocado, and poultry.  However, I feel you should avoid feeding a
Bloodhound any beef and its by-products, soy, beets, lamb, or white
rice.
BORDER COLLIE
82
Weight Standards: m - 45 to 55 lbs.; f - 35 to 45 lbs.
Coat: ranges from short to long; black with white markings,
also tricolor, liver and white, and blue and red merle.
Common Ailments: Hot spots, collie eye, von Willebrand's disease
The Border Collie originated in Scotland and is considered by some to
be the grandparent of all collies.  They are bred for their intelligence and
their ability to perform rather than how they conform to a set of physical
standards.  They are a true working dog.  While performing their duties,
they can cover a distance of over 100 miles without rest in a single day.
The primary food sources found in the Border Collie's native environment
would have included potatoes, wheat, corn, lamb, fish, and poultry.  The
Border Collie requires its mineral complex to be from sources that are
similar to those found in a coastal environment.  Breeders have indicated
that the minerals from other sources can produce many dietary problems
for this breed.
I recommend a blend of foods that are high in their carbohydrate-to-
protein ratio as best for a Border Collie.  The food sources should be
from potatoes, wheat, corn, lamb, fish, and poultry.  Food sources that
should be avoided by the Border Collie are soy, beet pulp, avocado, or
white rice.
BORDER TERRIER
83
Weight Standards: m/f - average 15 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 13 to 15.5 inches, f - 11.5 to 14 inches
Coat: short and harsh, needs to be stripped,
in many colors; Wheaton, grizzle or tan being the most popular
Common Ailments: a very hardy breed with few ailments
The Border Terrier developed in the Cheviot Hills on the northern
border of England.   Once called the Coquetdale Terrier it has been a
favorite of the farmers in its native land for centuries.  The gentry desired
the Border Terrier's size so that they would have a dog that could "go to
ground" after a fox, yet keep up with the horses during a chase.  Its most
unique physical characteristic is a very distinctive head with the
physical appearance like that of an otter.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been fox, hare, and
rodents - with wheat and low ground vegetables (potato, carrot, and
cabbage) that could be grown in the rocky soil of the Cheviot Hills area.
For the Border Terrier I recommend foods with horse meat, wheat and
yellow corn.  The starch and carbohydrates should come from potatoes
and not rice or beets.  You also should avoid feeding a Border Terrier
any soy, poultry, or white fish.
BORZOI
84
Weight Standards: m - 75 to 105 lbs., f - 60 to 90 lbs.
Height Standards: m - over 28 inches, f - over 26 inches
Coat: long, silky outer coat in white with black or tan
Common Ailments: bloat, torsion, hot spots, a picky eater
The Borzoi, once known as the Russian Wolfhound, developed in
Russia as a hunting companion to the aristocracy.   The history of this
breed can be traced for centuries with a set of breed standards first
established in the 1600's.  The history books also show us that this breed
almost became extinct in its native land.  The Bolsheviks started
slaughtering them due to their association with the aristocracy  during
the Russian Revolution of 1917.  A sight hound, it hunted by running
down and holding the prey until its human companion arrived.  The prey
it hunted ranged from the Russian wolf, which is a large ferocious beast
in its own right, to deer and small game animals such as rabbit. To hunt
this range of prey the Borzoi needed to be strong and courageous, yet
also possess extreme speed and agility.  All these traits are still retained
by today's Borzoi.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been those naturally
found in the coniferous forest and steppe grasslands of its native Russia.
These included the wolf, deer, and other small game animals.  This area
also provided the high fiber grains of wheat and alfalfa.
For the Borzoi I recommend foods that blend beef and horse meat with
wheat and yellow corn.  However, you should avoid feeding a Borzoi
white rice, soy, beet pulp, or fish (especially the white ocean varieties).
BOSTON TERRIER
85
Weight Standards: m/f -  around 25 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 15 inches
Coat: short and smooth in black and white or brindle and white
Common Ailments: respiratory and circulatory problems,
heat and cold sensitive, eye problems
The Boston Terrier developed in the seaport city of Boston in the
Northeastern United States.  The American Kennel Club first registered
this breed in 1893.  They are descendants of a cross between a White
English Terrier and the English Bulldog.  Boston Terriers were originally
known as Round Heads or Bull Terriers.  It is a breed that keeps itself
clean and is easy to maintain. It is also a breed that is very intelligent and
good with children.  Therefore, it is easy to see why once they were the
most popular breed of dog registered in the United states.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been cattle and dairy
products, wheat, beets, corn, and fish.
For the Boston Terrier I recommend foods that have beef and fish
blended with beet pulp, wheat, and yellow corn.  The Boston Terrier
should avoid any soy products, white rice, or highly acidic foods.
BOUVIER DES FLANDRES
86
Weight Standards: m - 90 to 110 lbs., f - 80 to 95 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 23.5 to 27.5 inches, f - 22.5 to 26.5 inches
Coat: medium length, double, harsh in solid gray or black
Common Ailments: bloat, dysplasia, hot spots and skin rashes
The Bouvier des Flandres developed in the area of Brussels, Belgium.
Major Police forces throughout the world use and respect this breed for
their loyalty and devotion to duty.  Being very intelligent, they are easy
to train.  However, they need an owner who will not turn over the
leadership role to the dog.  Their demanding personality can make life
miserable for the humans in the house, if allowed to assume the role of
the master.  When they are allowed to assume the role of the master, they
can be very hard to retrain.  Their original function in life was to round
up the cattle and drive them to market.  Often they use these same
herding skills with small children who are placed in their very capable
care.
Native food supplies from the environment near Brussels, Belgium,
would have included beef cattle, fish, a form of brown rice, and flax.
For the Bouvier des Flandres I recommend foods that are a blend of beef
meal and fish with brown rice and wheat. This food also should have a
very high vegetable oil content from wheat germ oil or linseed oil.
However, I feel you should avoid feeding a Bouvier des Flandres yellow
corn, soy (including soy oil coat conditioners), beet pulp, or horse meat.
BOXER
87
Weight Standards: m - average 70 lbs., f  -  around 60 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 22.5 to 25 inches, f - 21 to 23.5 inches
Coat: single, short, smooth, fawn or brindle with white
Common Ailments: bloat, tumors, digestive disorders
The Boxer originated in Germany as a medium-sized security dog.  This
breed was named for the manner in which it starts a fight; it makes
motions with its front paws like a man when boxing.
Without the proper nutrients (high in their fiber content) the Boxer has
a tendency to bloat and produce intestinal gas. This is partly due to the
size and length of the boxer's colon.  Other causes of gastric bloating are
associated with a gland in the boxer's digestive system.  This gland, the
pancreas, secretes digestive enzymes such as trypsin, amylase and
lypase.  Tests have revealed that the Boxer's pancreas produces these
digestive enzymes at a markedly different rate than those produced by
the pancreas of many other breeds in the same weight category.  Because
of this digestive enzyme difference, an all-breed dog food may cause the
Boxer to experience gastric problems not commonly found in other
breeds of dogs.
The primary food sources in the Boxer's native environment were whole
oat, rye, pork, and poultry.  I recommend a blend of these food sources
as an ideal diet because they are high in fats, fiber, and trace minerals.
Conversely, the worst blend would consist of fish, soy, rice, beet pulp
and horse meat or its by-products.
BRIARD
88
Weight Standards: m - 80 to 90 lbs., f - 70 to 80 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 23 to 27 inches, f - 22 to 25.5 inches
Coat: long and silky, slightly wavy and in any solid color but white
Common Ailments:  bloat, dysplasia
The Briard developed in the area of Southern France as a herding dog
for the nomadic Bask people.  As the working dog of the Bask, they
established themselves as excellent herding dogs, and when properly
trained, they are a pleasure to watch.  When they are running, their gait
is so smooth that they have the appearance of floating above the ground.
Marquis de Lafayette first brought them to this country in 1777 when he
came from France to join Washington's staff.  Some other people they
have accompanied in their illustrious history have been Napoleon and
Charlemagne.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been the type of
vegetation grown in the middle and high latitude forests and broadleaf
and broadleaf-conifer forests that the nomadic Bask traveled through in
Southern France and Eastern Spain.  The grains of wheat, corn, and wild
rice would have been the prevalent starch and fiber sources for their
dietary intake.  Meat sources would have consisted of mutton and pork
from the Basks' herds as well as fish from the local streams.
For the Briard I recommend foods that have a blend of lamb, fish, wheat,
and brown rice.  However, I suggest that you avoid feeding a Briard any
soy products, beet pulp, white rice, beef, or beef by-products.
BRITTANY SPANIEL
89
Weight Standards: m/f - 30 to 40 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 17.5 to 20.5 inches
Coat: short, single, wavy with feathers, liver and white
Common Ailments: very hardy with few ailments
The Brittany Spaniel developed in an area of today's France that was
controlled by the kings of England during the Middle Ages.  This area
was a popular hunting territory for the Norman nobles whose ancestors
crossed the English Channel and successfully conquered England in
1066.  These Norman nobles were responsible for the development of
a hunting dog, which is the same Brittany Spaniel we know today.
The primary nutrients of their native environment would have been
poultry, fish of the trout family, beets, and potatoes.  I note that this was
a swampy area and supported few grain crops.  I feel it was this factor
that led to a critical difference between the Brittany Spaniel's nutritional
requirements and those of the English Springer Spaniel -- especially in
the area of carbohydrate needs.
Reportedly, the Brittany can utilize a higher starch and carbohydrate to
protein ratio than its English cousin (The English Springer Spaniel)
when the carbohydrate source is beet pulp or potatoes.  The Brittany also
does poorly on blends containing corn, barley or wheat, which are good
for the English Springer Spaniel.
For the Brittany Spaniel, use foods with sources of poultry, lamb, and
beet pulp.  Avoid foods based on beef or horse meat and their by-
products as well as any yellow corn, barley, wheat, or soy products.
BRUSSELS GRIFFON
90
Weight Standards: m/f - 8 to 12 lbs.,
Height Standards: m/f - average 8 inches
Coat: short and thick in black tan or beige, needs stripping
Common Ailments: slipped stifle, eye and respiratory problems
The Brussels Griffon developed in the township of Brussels, Belgium,
where it first earned its keep as a ratter in the stables.  It then took a place
beside the coachman for the hansom cabs (a horse drawn coach) from
those stables.  Its new duties included being the watch dog or guardian
for the coach and its inhabitants.
Native food supplies for this breed would have included the stable's
rodent population as well as the grains eaten by those rodents.   Here, I
would like to note an important nutritional requirement for the Brussels
Griffon.  They have a requirement for the same dietary amount of the
alpha-Linolenate family of fatty acids as many larger dogs from other
environments. This per pound of body weight nutritional difference I
attribute to their native environment's high production of the grain flax
(a grain known to contain very high percentages of the alpha-Linolenate
fatty acids).
For this breed I recommend foods of horse meat and beef with grains of
wheat and yellow corn.  The dietary fatty acids should be from grain
sources similar to flax, and I recommend the commercial forms of
linseed or wheat germ oil since a Brussels Griffon can use these better
than fatty acids found in animal fat or soy.  Foods I suggest you avoid
feeding a Brussels Griffon are soy, poultry, lamb, avocado, and white
rice.
BULL TERRIER
91
Weight Standards: m/f - 35 to 55 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 18.5 inches
Coat: short and smooth in solid white or tricolored with black & tan
Common Ailments: inner ear infections, circulatory problems,
and skin rashes with hives
The Bull Terrier developed on the outskirts of London, England.  They
were first bred to be a pit fighter, but that soon ended.  They were then
taught to only defend themselves or their masters and not to seek out or
provoke a fight.  It was during this later stage in their history that they
received their reputation of being bred by gentlemen for gentlemen.  The
advertising industry has exploited their clownish personality  in
commercials from shoes to beer.  They are very fond of children and
make good family pets.  However, I have been told that this breed's
training should start at an early age, since they tend to have a stubborn
streak.
Native food supplies for this breed consisted of beef and potatoes with
carrots, cabbage, and wheat.  These are still the staples of the average
Londoner's diet.
For the Bull Terrier I recommend foods that contain the protein from
beef and wheat, the carbohydrates from potatoes, and the fiber from
cabbage.  However, I also recommend that you avoid feeding a Bull
Terrier any white rice, avocado, soy, or ocean fish.
BULLDOG
92
Weight Standards: m - average 50 lbs., f - average 40 lbs.
Height Standards: m - average 16 inches, f - average 14 inches
Coat: short and smooth in all colors except black
Common Ailments: heart and respiratory ailments,
 skin problems, hyper thyroid, drools and snuffles
The Bulldog developed in the northern farmland counties of the British
Empire where it was used in the "sport" of bull baiting.  Fortunately this
"sport" is gone and the Bulldog  remains.  It was one of the first breeds
recognized by the newly organized Kennel Club of England in 1873.  At
this time the breed standards were established.  These standards have not
changed since.  This breed is very strong (muscled and willed) and has
taken more than one child for a walk to wherever the dog decided to go.
Nutritionally the Bulldog is a breed of dog that is very slow to mature.
They reach their full adult body size at about 14 months but should be
nutritionally treated as a puppy until about the 30th month. This will
help develop healthier bones, teeth, muscles, and coats.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been beef and dairy
products blended with large quantities of high carbohydrate potatoes
and cabbage.  For this reason, today's Bulldog needs a food with a very
high percentage of carbohydrate and fiber but not a very high amount of
protein.
For the Bulldog I recommend foods high in potato type carbohydrates
with the protein being from a beef, wheat, and yellow corn blend.  You
should avoid feeding a Bulldog any white rice, soy, poultry, or lamb.
BULLMASTIFF
93
Weight Standards: m - 110 to 130 lbs., f - 100 to 120 lbs.
Height Standards: m -25 to 27 inches, f - 24 to 26 inches
Coat: short and smooth in brindle or fawn
Common Ailments: bloat, dysplasia, tumors, mouth boils
The Bullmastiff developed in Northern England where it earned its
keep as a game keeper's able assistant.  They patrolled the country
estates of the wealthy landowners and were trained to warn the game
keeper of poachers.  They ran down the poacher, threw him to the
ground, and held him without harm until the game keeper came.  For this
kind of job, they needed to be very intelligent, very territorial and very
powerful.  Traits originally sought in an estates Bullmastiff puppy
population have now become the norm for this breed.  Another norm for
this breed that developed in Northern England was the Bullmastiff's
unique nutritional needs.
Food supplies from the English estates played a role in the development
of this breed's nutritional needs.  These consisted of poultry, such as
chukker or quail, meats like venison, boar or hare, and grain crops of
wheat and oats.
For the Bullmastiff I recommend foods that blend equal amounts of beef
with horse meat and poultry.  The food also should have a very high fiber
content from whole oats, wheat, and whole corn.  However, I also feel
that you should avoid feeding any food that contains fish or soy or any
minerals that are from sulfate sources to a Bullmastiff.
CAIRN TERRIER
94
Weight Standards: m - 13 to 15 lbs., f - 12 to 14 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 10 inches, f - 9.5 inches
Coat: harsh and short and in any color except white
Common Ailments: thyroid problems
The Cairn Terrier developed in the Western Coastal Region of
Scotland.  At one time it was so popular on the island of Skye that it was
called the "Short Haired Skye."  However, to avoid any confusion, since
there was a breed with the registered name of "Skye Terrier", the dog
fanciers who first registered this breed with the English Kennel Club
presented it with the name of Cairn Terrier.  This terrier hunted in packs
to control the fur bearing vermin, such as otter and fox that inhabited the
rocky shoreline of this breed's native environment.  Their name "Cairn"
comes from the Galic language and means "the heap of stones where a
fox would burrow."
Native food supplies for this breed would have been those that are
associated with a harsh coastal North Sea environment.  These included
meats of the otter or fox, which inhabited the rocky cliffs, and vegetables
that could grow well in the shallow rocky soil.
For the Cairn I recommend foods of ocean fish blended with poultry and
wheat.  I also recommend that you avoid feeding a Cairn any soy
products, rice (both white or brown), or avocado.
CARDIGAN WELSH CORGI
95
Weight Standards: m/f - average 33 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 12 inches
Coat: short and harsh in tan and black with white
Common Ailments: spinal disc and digestive disorders
The Cardigan Welsh Corgi developed in the area of Cardiganshire, in
the Welsh highlands over 3000 years ago.  The first written report of the
Cardigan comes from the Celtic tribes that inhabited the area we now
know as Wales.  They described a dog that was a good baby-sitter and
hunter.  This breed is often mistaken for the Pembroke Welsh Corgi.
However, if there is a relationship between these two very different
breeds, it is very distant.  Opposite to the rounding up actions of the other
breeds of dog that are in the AKC's herding group, the Cardigan Welsh
Corgi chased the tribes' cattle.  This scattered the cattle over a larger
grazing area, thus insuring the herd a sufficient amount of food.  This
action insured survival of the cattle in a native environment that was
very rocky and where grass was very scarce.
The native food supplies for all inhabitants of the Cardiganshire area,
including the Cardigan Welsh Corgi, would have been the type that
could survive in the rocky soil.  These would have included rye,
cabbage, potatoes, and carrots.  Also native to this environment would
have been meats of the hare, both ocean and fresh water fish, and a very
stringy beef with a low fat content.
For the Cardigan Welsh Corgi I recommend foods that are a blend of fish
and small amounts of beef combined with rye, oats, and yellow corn.
You should avoid feeding a blend that contains white rice, soy, or beet
pulp.
CHESAPEAKE BAY RETRIEVER
96
Weight Standards: m - 65 to 75 lbs., f - 55 to 65 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 23 to 26 inches, f - 21 to 24 inches
Coat: short and coarse with a thick undercoat, in brown or tan
Common Ailments: skin problems, dysplasia, liver &kidney failure
The Chesapeake Bay Retriever developed in 1807 in Maryland,
U.S.A..  This is one breed that can trace its beginnings to two specific
dogs named "Sailor" and "Canton."  The Chesapeake is a breed that is
extremely good in the home with children; yet it is known more as a
hunter than a pet.
This breed has a very dense undercoat that it keeps oiled naturally when
fed the proper balance of the alpha-linolenic fatty acids.  This
characteristic makes it a good breed for people who are allergic to the
skin dander produced by most other breeds.  The fact that it naturally
produces these oils (only one of six breeds that does) also gives it a
whole set of different nutritional requirements than those breeds that do
not produce skin oil.
The native nutrients for this breeds forefathers are unknown.  Yet they
do well on fish and water foul, such as duck and goose (which are very
high in their fat to meat ratio), and grains such as wild rice and wheat.
For this breed I recommend a commercial food blend that is high in
poultry fats.  Its protein should be from poultry as well.  The food should
contain brown, not white rice, and any other carbohydrates should be
supplied by wheat.  For the Chesapeake Bay Retriever it is best to avoid
foods that contain beef or horse meat, lamb, beet pulp, or soy.
CHIHUAHUA
97
Weight Standards: m - 5 to 6 lbs., f - 4 to 5 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 5 inches
Coat: two varieties; long and soft; short and soft.
Common Ailments:  slipped stifle, rheumatism,
gum ailments, liver failure, and temperature sensitive
The Chihuahua that we know today was named after its area of origin,
Chihuahua, Mexico.  Archaeologists have given us the best account of
this breed's history by finding its association with the ancient Aztecs.
The Chihuahua was both a religious necessity and a working dog for the
Aztec priest.  It earned its keep in the temples by controlling the rodent
population.  Archaeologists also show that this breed lived a life span
almost double to that expected by today's Chihuahua owner.  I believe
there is an association between this breed's unique nutritional
requirements, the nutrient levels found in all-breed dog foods, and this
breed's reduced life span.
Rain forests and jungles of Mexico and South America provided the
native food supplies for this breed.  Tropical fruits such as mango and
avocado were plentiful in this environment and would have been a staple
of the dietary intake.  Meats were rodents or wild boar and poultry.
For today's Chihuahua I recommend foods that contain avocado blended
with poultry and rice.  However, I feel you should avoid feeding a food
that contains beef, or beet pulp to this nutritionally delicate breed.
98
Weight Standards: m/f - 6 to 8 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 5 inches
Coat: hairless except for crest on head
and fringes on feet and at tip of tail
Common Ailments: body rashes, liver failure, temperature sensitive
The Chinese Crested, a "hairless breed", developed in China as a
favorite pet of the Mandarins.   However, it is now extinct in that area
of the world.  For the last five centuries the Crested that we know today
has been a resident in the West Indies and coastal port cities of South
America.  The Crested survived, thanks to the sailors from the Clipper
Ships out of Spain and Portugal.  These ships traded with China, taking
this breed to other ports of call as both a food and a trade item.  It is the
smallest of the "hairless breeds"; such a small dog to have such a very
long and colorful history.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been those from the
coastal cities of China and later, South America.  The primary nutrients
would have consisted of ocean fish, white rice and soy products.
For the Chinese Crested Dog I recommend foods that have a blend of
fish and rice.  These should be low in their fiber content.  I also
recommend you avoid feeding this breed a food with high carbohydrate
percentages or meats like beef and horse meat.
CHINESE CRESTED
99
Weight Standards: m/f - 55 to 65 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 18 to 22 inches
Coat: Bristly textured, with loose folds, colors of solid fawn,
red, black or chocolate
Common Ailments: dysplasia, bloat, eye ailments, hot spots
and skin pigmentation problems
The Chinese Shar-Pei developed in China prior to the Han Dynasty
(202 B.C. - 220 A.D.).  This time period in China was the "Warring
States period ".  The breed of dog that emerged during this era was
appropriate for the attitudes that prevailed.  First bred to be fighting
dogs, their owners developed a breed of dog that had very loose folds of
skin so that their opponent could not easily get to a vital spot for the kill.
Other physical characteristics of this breed are:  they can have a blue -
black tongue;  the texture of their coat hair is unlike that of any other
breed's;  They posses a jaw structure that is totally unique in canines.
These unique physical characteristics suggest that this breed is unlike
any other, just like their unique nutritional requirements.
Native food supplies included beets, sweet potato and other tuber type
ground vegetables.  Grains were rice, corn, and wheat.  Meats were
poultry, oxen and pork.
For the Chinese Shar-Pei I recommend foods that blend horse meat,
poultry, beet pulp, wheat and rice.  These should be high in their fiber
and carbohydrate content.  I also suggest that you avoid feeding a
Chinese Shar-Pei any avocado, potato, ocean fish, beef or lamb.
CHINESE SHAR-PEI
CHOW CHOW
100
Weight Standards: m/f - average 70 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 20 inches
Coat: long, dense, double, single color
Common Ailments: hot spots, eye problems, ear infections
The Chow Chow originated in China (Tibet) where it was raised as a
meat source for human consumption.  This was done on a scale that can
be compared to the sheep ranches of New Zealand or the cattle ranches
in our own country today.
Since the Chow Chow was used as a meat source for human consumption,
it was fed a diet of grains and vegetables.  One indicator of the Chow
Chow's development as a vegetarian is the difference in the mouth, jaw,
and tooth structure from those breeds that developed as "meat eaters."
For example, the Chow has a set of teeth that are flatter than the sharp
incisors found in the carnivorous breeds.
The Chow has two other distinctive physical features that are unique to
this breed of dog;  first, a blue-black tongue, and second, a lack of
angulation in the lower joint of the hindlimbs.
The primary food sources of the Chow Chow's native environment were
rice, wheat, soy, and some occasional fish.  Thus, a blend of these foods
would be the ideal diet for the Chow Chow.  Conversely, the worst blend
would contain beef, horse meat, lamb, and poultry or any of their by-
products.
CLUMBER SPANIEL
101
Weight Standards: m - 70 to 85 lbs., f - 65 to 75 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 17 to 18 inches
Coat: short & wavy with longer feathering, white or lemon colors
Common Ailments: dysplasia, skin rashes and ear ailments
The Clumber Spaniel developed prior to the French Revolution (1789)
on the estate of a French nobleman, the Duc de Noialles .  During the
Revolution these dogs were taken to the Clumber Park Estate of the
English Duke of Newcastle,  who was a fancier of the breed and a friend
of the Duc de Noialles .  It was from the kennels on the English estate
that the breed became popular.  The breed bears its present name to
honor their English Clumber Park home.  This is the largest of the
spaniels and their size is a definite nutritional factor when compared to
other breeds.  Most of their body weight is due to muscle fiber, which
is heavier than fat on a square inch basis.  Due to this feature they can
store more protein for energy use than many retrievers that need high
carbohydrate diets to fuel quick energy bursts for use during a hunt.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been poultry of the game
variety (chukker, quail etc.) and meats such as venison and mutton.  The
vegetables of their native environment would have been potatoes and
cabbage and the grains would have been flax, wheat and corn.
For the Clumber Spaniel I recommend foods with a blend of poultry,
lamb, potato, wheat, and yellow corn.  However, I feel you should avoid
feeding a food containing white rice, fish, beef, or horse meat by-
products to this breed.
COLLIE
102
Weight Standards: m - 60 to 75 lbs., f - 50 to 60 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 24 to 26 inches, f - 22 to 24 inches
Coat: Long dense, straight outer coat-double coated with
 a very heavy undercoat. Blows coat 2-3 times a year normally
Common Ailments: collie eye (detached retina), skin-coat problems
The Collie originated in the Scottish Highlands as a herding dog for
both sheep and cattle.  First written about in the 14th century, it received
its name from the type of animals with which it associated.  Black faced
sheep were called "Colleys"; therefore the dogs that drove them to
market were called the "Colley dogs."
The Collie has high requirements for both the mineral complex and fat
soluble vitamins per pound of body weight when compared to many
other breeds. .Fleischman laboratories established their vitamin D
requirement in 1944.  The Fleischman laboratories test shows the Collie
to have a requirement for this one fat soluble vitamin over 9 times what
other breeds require.  The National Research Council used this report
when they were considering the minimum amounts to recommend for
all breed dog food.  The report is cited on page 24, in the U.S.
Government National Research Council publication Nutrient
Requirements of Dogs, (1985 revised edition),
The Collie thrives on a diet that is rich in low ground type vegetables.
The ideal meat protein blend should include lamb and poultry with a
limited amount of beef.  Collies should avoid foods containing yellow
corn, rice, fish or soy.
COTON DE TULEAR
103
Weight Standards: m/f - 12 to 15 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 10 to 12 inches
Coat: long, and with the feel of cotton; color varies from
 white, white with champagne highlights, and
a dusting of black hairs to white with black patches.
Common Ailments: skin rashes, tooth loss & respiratory problems
The Coton de Tulear developed in Madagascar, which is now the
Malagasy Republic.  This is an island republic located about 250 miles
off the African coast in the Indian Ocean.  The Coton de Tulear is called
the "Royal Dog of Madagascar" because it was once owned exclusively
by the royal family of the island.  On the island anyone else found with
a dog of this breed in their possession risked being sentenced to death.
Due to the original restrictions on the breeding and ownership of this
breed, it remains today one of the world's rarest breeds.
Native food supplies found in Madagascar for this breed would have
been similar to brown rice, goat, fish, pork and poultry.
For the Coton de Tulear I recommend a food that is a blend of brown rice,
fish, avocado and poultry.  I also suggest that you keep foods such as
beef or horse meat out of their diet.
CURLY COATED RETRIEVER
104
Weight Standards: m/f - average 65 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 23.5 inches
Coat: short and very curly, in colors of solid liver or black
Common Ailments: dysplasia, liver and kidney failure
The Curly Coated Retriever developed in the 16th century as both an
upland game dog and water retriever.  An English sportsman used two
breeds of Spaniel and a retrieving Setter to produce the Curly Coated
Retriever we now know.  It has an extremely steady temperament and
is very good around children.  As a retriever, it has a very tender mouth
that will not damage the game.  The Curly Coated Retriever is now the
most popular retriever in both New Zealand and Australia.
Native food supplies for this breed and its forefathers would have been
upland game birds, such as chukker and quail, and waterfowl, such as
duck and goose.  Grain crops of wheat and corn grew in this environment.
These grains are still used by sportsmen today to attract wild game birds
along their flyway.
For the Curly Coated Retriever I recommend foods that consist of
poultry and wheat.  The best blend for this breed should contain very
high amounts of the poultry fat.  I also recommend you avoid feeding a
commercial food that contains any beef, soy or white rice to a Curly
Coated Retriever.
105
Weight Standards: m/f -16 to 22 lbs. (miniature 10 to 12 lbs.)
Height Standards: m/f - 9 to 10 inches, (miniature around 5 inches)
Coat: three different coat types;
1) long and soft, 2) short and soft, 3) wire haired.
Common Ailments: spinal disk problems
The Dachshund originated in Germany as a hunting dog.  They worked
in packs and are keen nosed and tenacious in pursuit of their quarry.  The
specific part of Germany where they developed had rocky foothills
housing wild boar and burrowing animals like badger and ground
rodents.  The Dachshund's long low body was ideal for going into the
tunnel homes of this type of quarry.
The area in Germany this breed can call home also produced many
varieties of vegetables such as potatoes, cabbage, carrots, and greens.
Nutrients from these vegetable sources have high amounts of fat soluble
vitamins such as vitamin A as beta carotene; therefore, I feel today's
Dachshund will do best on a diet with its vitamin A source being the
molecular structure of beta carotene instead of palmitate or fish oil.
Note:  Many breeders claim the Dachshund requires a very high fat - low
protein ratio in their food.  Therefore, I suggest feeding this breed
commercial dog food formulated for puppies during its entire life cycle.
I feel the best food blend for the Dachshund will contain horse meat,
wheat, yellow corn, and beef.  The food sources to avoid with this breed
include beet pulp, soy, and both the white and brown forms of rice.
DACHSHUND
106
Weight Standards: m - 55 to 65 lbs., f - 45 to 55 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 19 to 23 inches
Coat: short and fine in white with black or liver spots
Common Ailments: cataracts, skin rashes, hot spots, liver and
kidney failure, deafness related to nerve impulse blockage
The Dalmatian has been known world wide since the Middle Ages.
The largest numbers of them are located in Central Europe and the
British Islands  Theories about the origins of this breed are numerous.
The two most popular theories are that they developed either in Hungary
or in Africa.  Because of their coat, I would guess the warmer climate
of Africa.
Due to a Dalmatian fancier who was a friend, this was the first breed that
came to my attention as having nutritional requirements different from
other breeds of dogs.  This is also a breed I cite when asked about the
length of time it takes a dog to adapt to nutrients different from those
found in its native environment.  The Dalmatian has remained the same
world wide for many centuries.  Yet the ailments suffered by this one
breed vary from one area to the next.  I feel the different ailments
suffered are a direct result of this one breed's exposure to different
environmental food supplies.
Today's Dalmatian seems to do best when fed a blend of lamb, poultry,
and white rice.  The commercial foods that seem to give this breed the
most problems will contain soy, beef, or horse meat by-products, and
high fiber products like wheat, oats, and yellow corn.
DALMATIAN
107
Weight Standards: m/f - 18 to 24 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 8 to 12 inches
Coat: medium long & rough textured, in mustard or peppered color
Common Ailments: kidney & liver failure,  slipped stifle,
and ear infections
The Dandie Dinmont Terrier developed in the border country between
England and Scotland.  The first written report of this breed, in the early
1700's, described a mustard colored ratter and hunting dog used for otter
and badger. They became popular and were renamed after Sir Walter
Scott published the novel Guy Mannering in 1814.  One character in the
novel, Dandie Dinmont, owned a pack of pepper and mustard colored
terriers.  Sir Walter Scott described the dogs in such glowing terms that
the pepper or mustard colored terriers of the north country became very
popular throughout the British Empire.  When the breed was registered
in 1876 it bore the name Dandie Dinmont Terrier.
Native food supplies for this breed came from the rocky soil of the
border country and consisted of meats from rodent, otter, badger, and
poultry.  Vegetable crops were cabbage, potato, and carrots.
For the Dandie I recommend foods that have a blend of poultry, horse
meat, fish, and potato carbohydrates.  To get this blend you may have
to mix two commercial foods together.  You should avoid feeding a
Dandie any blends that contain soy, yellow corn, or beet pulp.
DANDIE DINMONT TERRIER
108
Weight Standards: m - 70 to 75 lbs., f - 60 to 65 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 26 to 28 inches, f - 24 to 26 inches
Coat: short and smooth in black with tan or red
Common Ailments: circulatory problems, cold sensitive,
bloat and kidney failure
The Doberman Pinscher originated in the shadows of Germany's beer
breweries.  Today the Dobe is internationally renowned as a security
dog.  It has an extremely high degree of loyalty to its master and can be
very territorial, yet its temperament also makes it good with children.
The Doberman Pinscher needs a special blend to receive good bio-
nutritive value from protein.  When compared to other breeds of the
same body weight, it requires higher amounts of certain amino acids.
The protein should be high in Phenylalanine and Thyrosine.  Since the
bulk nutrients of the area where the Doberman Pinscher developed were
high in these essential amino acids, this breed requires this same protein
blend today.  Food sources found in the Doberman Pinscher's native
environment included grain crops used for brewing German beer with
pork and beef meat sources.
The protein sources I feel would be the best for this breed of dog are a
blend of beef, corn, wheat, and horse meat.  Conversely, the worst blend
would contain high amounts of poultry, ocean fish, or white rice.
DOBERMAN PINSCHER
109
Weight Standards: m - 28 to 34 lbs., f - 26 to 32 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 16 to 17 inches, f - 15 to 16 inches
Coat: flat, long and wavy in a variety of colors
Common Ailments: hot spots and other skin and coat problems
The English Cocker Spaniel can trace its origins to Spain just like most
of the other "Spaniel" breeds.  The breed became popular in the 14th
century when imported to England as a woodland bird hunting dog.  The
woodland bird that this spaniel hunted was the Woodcock, commonly
called a "Cocker"; therefore, this breed became known as a Cocker
Spaniel.  The English Cocker has a harder time adapting to food changes
than does the American Cocker.  We also see more obvious reactions to
food allergies with this breed than their American relative.  In this
country the English Cocker suffers from many skin allergies that are not
commonly found within the breed in their native England.  I feel this is
due to the water differences between these two areas compounded by the
differences in mineral sources present in most commercial foods from
these two countries.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been very high in
carbohydrate content.  They included potatoes with other starchy
vegetables, grains blended with meats from poultry (woodcock and
other upland game birds), and mutton.
For the English Cocker I recommend foods that contain poultry, lamb
wheat, oats, and potato.  Also the minerals should be from a gluconate
form and not a sulfate source.  I recommend that you avoid feeding an
English Cocker soy, ocean fish, beef, or yellow corn.
ENGLISH COCKER SPANIEL
110
Weight Standards: m/f - 70 to 75 pounds
Height Standards: m - 24 inches, f - 23 inches
Coat: short and smooth yet very thick, in white with black
and brown  tricolor
Common Ailments: hot spots and liver failure
The English Foxhound developed through very selective breeding on
the hunting estates of England's upper crust.  The breed has always been
used for one purpose; that of running down the fox ahead of horsemen.
They are a very lean and muscular breed.  This physical characteristic
of body fat to muscle tissue ratio is a nutritional factor that needs to be
considered when looking at their food requirements.  They can store
large amounts of protein to supply their energy requirements during the
hunt.  They also require large quantities of water during this exercise.
Food supplies for this breed included the fox, hare, and other small
animals from their native environment combined with the type of
vegetables and grain crops found in England's central farmlands.
For the English Foxhound I recommend foods high in their fiber
content.  The carbohydrates should be from sources of potato, oats, and
wheat with the meats from lean horse meat and beef.  I also feel you
should avoid feeding an English Foxhound any ocean fish, soy, poultry,
or yellow corn.
ENGLISH FOXHOUND
111
Weight Standards: m - 60 to 70 lbs., f - 50 to 60 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 25 inches, f - 24 inches
Coat: long and straight, silky, with feathering
Common Ailments: dysplasia, hot spots and kidney failure
The English Setter came to England in the 14th century from Spain.  Its
name comes from the way it "set" a game bird for the hunter to net.
Today, most sportsmen consider this breed to be the most elegant
gundog there is.
The English Setter requires large amounts of arachidonic acid.  It will
produce this acid through natural body functions, if fed food sources that
contain certain polyunsaturated fatty acids.  These must contain the
proper balance of linoleic, linolenic, and oleic acids.  You can tell if an
English Setter is receiving the proper diet and producing the required
arachidonic acid by the gloss of the coat.  The best sources of the
polyunsaturated fatty acids for this breed are wheat germ oil or safflower
oil.  The worst balance of the fatty acids for this breed would be found
in sources of beef fat or soy oils.
The English Setter developed in an area of Spain that produced grain
crops of wheat and brown rice, poultry (mainly game birds), and cattle.
I feel the ideal diet for the English Setter is a blend of foods that are high
in natural fiber with a high carbohydrate to low protein ratio.  The best
commercial food blend would contain poultry, lamb, and  brown rice
with wheat and yellow corn.  Conversely the least desirable blend would
contain horse meat, fish, rice, and soy.
ENGLISH SETTER
112
Weight Standards: m - 49 to 55 lbs., f - 44 to 50 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 20 inches, f - 19 inches
Coat: long, smooth, double, tricolored
Common Ailments: thyroid disorders, hip dysplasia
The English Springer Spaniel originated as an upland game bird
hunting dog in Spain during the late 1200's and early 1300's.  It was then
taken to the British Islands where it completed its development into the
English Springer we know today.  They are named "Springer" because
they were used to "spring" game for the sportsman's net and "Spaniel"
because they came to England from Spain.
This breed primarily developed on a diet of corn, wheat, and fowl (such
as partridge, quail, and pheasant).  English Springer Spaniel owners
should be aware that protein from wild poultry sources has amino acid
profiles that are quite different from those of chicken by-products used
in many commercial all-breed dog foods.  Therefore, this breed will
require more than just chicken or chicken by-products as the meat
protein in its food to come close to the best amino acid balance required.
For the English Springer Spaniel I recommend a blend of corn, wheat,
and lamb with chicken.  The food also should be high in its poultry fat
content.  I also suggest that you avoid protein sources based on beet pulp
or soy with beef or horse meat and their by-products for this breed.
ENGLISH SPRINGER SPANIEL
113
Weight Standards: m/f - 9 to 12 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f  - average 9.5 inches
Coat: long soft & wavy in red, red & white, black & tan or tricolor
Common Ailments: subject to slipped stifle, eye lacerations
and respiratory problems
The English Toy Spaniel developed in England and was popular before
the reign of William of Orange.  It was a constant companion of the
English Cocker Spaniel that developed in the same time and area.  The
English Toy Spaniel we know today is a product of selective breeding
that took place just prior to the reign of Edward VII and bears little
physical resemblance to its predecessors.    In England and most of the
world this breed's name is "THE KING CHARLES SPANIEL ".  It is
called "THE TOY SPANIEL " only in the United States and Canada.  This
is due to Edward VII's refusal to allow the name Toy Spaniel  to become
the registered name for this breed since it had so little in common with
the other "Spaniel" breeds of England during the time of his reign.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been the same as the
English Cocker.  They consisted of potatoes and other starchy vegetables
blended with meats from wild poultry (woodcock and other upland
game birds), and mutton.
For the English Toy Spaniel I recommend foods that contain poultry,
lamb, wheat, oats, and potato.  I also recommend that you avoid feeding
an English Toy Spaniel any soy products, ocean fish, beef, or yellow
corn.
ENGLISH TOY SPANIEL
114
Weight Standards: m/f - 35 to 50 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 18 inches
Coat: short with a silky texture, in solid black, liver or mahogany
Common Ailments:  dysplasia, liver and kidney failure,
respiratory problems
The Field Spaniel has a history that closely resembles that of the
English Cocker Spaniel. Its forefathers came to England from Spain,
and English breeders developed it for hunting upland game birds.
Today's Field Spaniel has gained respect of dog fanciers and is steadily
gaining in popularity.  However, at one time the breed suffered in
popularity, and today remains one of the rarest of the sporting breeds.
This loss of popularity started in England because of some breeders who
were originally producing the Field Spaniel.  In their effort to produce
a sturdier dog than the English Cocker, they indiscriminately bred a dog
with a number of negative traits.  Concerned breeders removed these
negative traits in later generations.  Today's Field Spaniel is a well
balanced and desirable hunting companion.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been woodcock, chukker,
quail, pheasant, and other upland game birds combined with the grain
crops and vegetables found in middle latitude England.
For the Field Spaniel I recommend foods that have a blend of wheat,
oats, poultry, and lamb.  However, I feel you should avoid feeding a
Field Spaniel any soy, white rice, beet pulp, beef, and horse meats or
their by-products.
FIELD SPANIEL
115
Weight Standards: m/f - over 110 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 27 to 29.5 inches, f - 26 to 28 inches
Coat: short and dense in any color including brindle except white
Common Ailments: dysplasia
The Fila Brasileiro developed in Brazil as the result of crossbreeding
select Portuguese herding breeds with the English Mastiff.  It is a very
courageous dog that hunts the Jaguar.  It makes a great watchdog
because it is territorial and loyal.  However, these same traits can cause
it to be overly aggressive with strangers.
The Fila Brasileiro is a very heavy-boned breed that requires a high
quantity of the mineral complex throughout its life to develop and
maintain its skeletal structure.  Also, it is a breed that is slow to mature
(nutritionally), even though it reaches its adult body size in 18 to 24
months.  Therefore, it should be kept on a puppy feeding program until
fully developed at about 40 months of age.
Native food supplies for this breed came from the border of the rain
forest (selvas) in Brazil.  These included cattle, sheep, mango Papaya,
and brown rice.
For the Fila Brasileiro I recommend foods that are high in their fiber
content and have the meat sources from a beef and lamb blend.  The food
also should contain avocado, beet pulp, and brown rice.  However, I feel
you should avoid feeding this breed any poultry, white rice, or soy
products.
FILA BRASILEIRO
116
Weight Standards: m/f - 60 to 70 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 23 inches
Coat: soft with mild feathering, black in color
Common Ailments:  hot spots, dysplasia
The Flat-Coated Retriever we know today developed as a result of dog
fancier S.E. Shirley's efforts.  S.E. Shirley lived in England and was also
the founder of The Kennel Club of England in 1873.  The breeds that
Shirley used to develop the Flat-Coated Retriever were the Labrador
Retriever, the St. Johns Newfoundland, and the Collie.  In the late 1800's
and early 1900's the Flat-Coated Retriever was one of the most popular
show dogs in Britain.  It has a wonderful temperament and is good in the
home with children as well as being an excellent water retriever and
field dog.
When we are tracing the nutrients that would have played a role in this
relatively new breed's development, we must consider its forefather's
native food supplies.  The native food supplies for each of these are listed
in the chapters that pertain to the Flat-Coated's forefathers; the Labrador
Retriever, the St. Johns Newfoundland and the Collie.
For the Flat-Coated Retriever I recommend foods that are a blend of
poultry, fish, wheat, oats, and yellow corn.  However, I also recommend
that you avoid feeding a Flat-Coated Retriever any soy products, beet
pulp, and any red meats with low fat content.
FLAT-COATED RETRIEVER
117
Weight Standards: m - average 18 lbs., f - average 16 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - less than 15.5 inches
Coat: two types: Smooth variety - short, fine textured and smooth.
Wirehaired variety - short, extremely dense and wiry (this type needs
stripping). Both found in white with black, ginger or tan
Common Ailments:  nasal problems (drip), hot spots, hyperthyroid
The Fox Terrier comes in two varieties.  Both varieties of this one breed
developed in England to hunt fox.  They were first written about in the
18th century as able hunters that could "gallop and stay and follow their
fox up a drain."  To put this in lay terms, it means the Fox Terrier could
keep up with the hounds and horse while it had a fox on the run.  It then
(because of its body size) could follow the fox into a hole to chase it out
for the hunter.  Both the smooth and wire varieties of this breed have
been in the show ring in the United States for over 100 years.  Because
of their history as a hunting dog, Fox Terriers were shown in the sporting
breed group.  They were recently placed with the terrier group.
Native food supplies for both varieties of this breed would have been the
grain crops of England; those that would grow in the rocky soil in a damp
climate, and meats from the fox, badger and other borough land game
they hunted.
For the Fox Terrier I recommend foods that contain beef, horse meat,
and grains of oats, wheat, and yellow corn.  However, I also recommend
you avoid feeding a Fox Terrier any ocean variety of fish, soy, or white
rice.
FOX TERRIER
118
Weight Standards: m/f - under 28 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 11.5 inches
Coat: short and smooth, in brindle, fawn or white
Common Ailments:  eye and respiratory problems
The French Bulldog, Bouldouge Francais , was developed in France
by a group of lace workers who emigrated from Nottingham, England.
The dog that they brought with them was a toy sized English Bulldog.
They selectively bred these to local dogs that had a unique head and ear
shape.  The results of this breeding program gave us a small breed with
the classic body of a Bulldog and a unique domed shaped skull.  The
skull has a domed appearance because of its flatness between the ears
and a slight curvature directly above the eyes.  The ears are "bat ear" in
shape and give the French Bulldog a quaint and inquiring look.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been found in both the
areas of Nottingham, England (located on the banks of the Trent River)
and Central France.  The grain crops of both areas are very similar with
sugar beets being abundant.  The other main crops are wheat, oats, and
barley. The meat from both areas is also similar.  It is from beef and dairy
cattle raised for both tilling and food.
For the French Bulldog I recommend foods that are a blend of beef,
wheat, oats, and beet pulp.  However, I feel you should avoid feeding a
French Bulldog any soy products, avocado, or white rice.
FRENCH BULLDOG
119
Weight Standards: m - 80 to 85 lbs., f - 65 to 70 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 24 to 26 inches, f - 22 to 24 inches
Coat: dense, straight, short, tricolored
Common Ailments: dysplasia, and gastric disorders
The German Shepherd Dog originated in the Alsatian Region of
Germany.  Today it is used world wide as a sentry, police dog, tracker,
drug dog, search and rescue dog, and guide dog for the blind.  The
official name for this breed is German Shepherd Dog , though it is often
called the German Shepherd or just Shepherd.  For many years this was
the only breed shown at AKC shows within the U.S.A. that had the word
dog  in its official name.
The German Shepherd Dog is unique because it has a very short colon
in comparison to other breeds of the same body weight.  For this reason
a high fiber diet is required to slow the movement of food through this
breed's digestive track, thereby allowing more time for the nutrients to
be drawn out. This high fiber diet will result in a larger stool but better
assimilation of the food. I caution that this fiber must be from the proper
sources and the amount should be carefully controlled.  Too much fiber
or fiber of the wrong type can cause impacted bowels.
The environment for the Alsatian Region of Germany provided this
breed with primary food sources of beef, wheat, and leafy greens like
cabbage and alfalfa. Thus, I recommend a blend of these food sources
as the ideal base diet for the German Shepherd.  Conversely, I feel the
worst food blend for the German Shepherd Dog would contain fish, soy,
or rice.
GERMAN SHEPHERD DOG
120
Weight Standards: m - 55 to 70 lbs., f - 45 to 60 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 23 to 25 inches, f - 21 to 23 inches
Coat: short, single, smooth, liver and white
Common Ailments: Dysplasia, an overeater
The German Shorthaired Pointer can trace its origins to the 12th
Century city of Constantinople.  This city is now called Istanbul and is
in today's country of Turkey.  This breed is an all-purpose gun dog
developed for the sportsman who wanted a companion that could hunt
either fur or feather on land or water.
The nutritional environment of 12th Century Constantinople would
have provided meats of poultry, goat, and fish.  The fruits would have
included the fig, grape, orange, and olive.  The predominant grains of the
area were barley, a brown rice and wheat. This nutritional combination
played a major role in determining the dietary requirements of the
German Shorthaired Pointer.  One result was that this breed developed
a requirement for a high fat and oil content in its food from vegetable
oils. Another is its need for proteins that are high in methionine (from
the types of fruit named), and leucine and lysine (from the fish and
poultry meat sources).
I recommend you look for a food that contains a blend of poultry, fish,
lamb, avocado, and wheat for this breed.  I also recommend you avoid
blends that contain beef by-products, soy, yellow corn, and beet pulp for
a German Shorthaired Pointer.
GERMAN SHORTHAIRED POINTER
121
Weight Standards: m - 60 to 75 lbs., f - 50 to 60 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 24 to 26 inches, f - not under 22 inches
Coat: double, top coat short, dense and wiry in liver & white
Common Ailments:  bloat, gas and other intestinal tract problems
The German Wirehaired Pointer developed in Northern Germany
because sportsmen wanted both a water retriever and a pointer of upland
game-birds.  This breed is a very heavy shedder in the warmer summer
months. This seasonal shedding is a nutritional factor that should be
considered in their dietary requirements.  Since their coat's fiber is made
from protein, their protein requirements change when it comes time to
grow their winter coat. I suggest an increase in their dietary protein
during the fall months to help produce the heavier new winter coat.  The
increase in the dietary protein content should be about 2% to 3% above
their normal maintenance diet.  This can be achieved by feeding them
a commercial formula with the same base sources as in their everyday
food, but with a higher protein amount.  Note; Many puppy formulas
would meet these changes.  Once the new coat is set, they can then return
to lower protein food for the balance of the year.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been poultry of the game
bird variety, mutton, pork, and fresh water fish.  Also available was
wheat with other high carbohydrate / starchy vegetables like cabbage
and potato.
For the German Wirehaired Pointer I recommend foods that are a blend
of poultry, lamb, wheat, potato, and fish.  I also recommend you avoid
feeding a soy and white rice blend to a German Wirehaired Pointer.
GERMAN WIREHAIRED POINTER
122
Weight Standards: m - 75 to 95 lbs., f - 75 to 85 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 25.5 to 27.5 inches, f - 23.5 to 25.5 inches
Coat: double coated, short, dense, very harsh texture with leg
and chin feathering in solid black or salt and pepper
Common Ailments:  dysplasia and bloat
The Giant Schnauzer developed in the German kingdoms of
Wurttenberg and Bavaria where this dog was known as a "Munchener"
in the early 15th century.    The original development of this breed was
from a line of the smaller Standard Schnauzers.  German meat packers
selectively bred these dogs to a larger size dog that could both herd and
guard.  A special note:  this breed's skeletal system is not fully developed
until about 36 months of age, even though a 12 month old puppy may
have reached a full adult body size.  Therefore, as with other breeds that
are slow to develop nutritionally, this breed must be kept on a puppy diet
until fully developed both internally as well as externally.
Native food supplies for this breed would have included the type of
grains used in the German breweries such as hops and flax with ground
vegetables such as potato and cabbage.  Also wheat and sugar beet were
grown for the herds of beef cattle with which this breed associated.
For the Giant Schnauzer I recommend foods that have beef as their meat
source blended with beet and grains of wheat and corn.  I also recommend
that you avoid feeding a Giant Schnauzer any soy, white rice, or poultry.
GIANT SCHNAUZER
123
Weight Standards: m/f - up to 35 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 14 inches
Coat: a harsh textured coat in blue, blue and tan or Wheaton color
Common Ailments:  hot spots, liver and kidney disorders
The Glen of Imaal Terrier is a true dog of Ireland, with a history that
dates from 2500 BC.  It is a courageous breed that originally hunted
badgers in the rocky cliffs of Wicklow County on the southeast coast of
Ireland.  One of the things this breed does differently than other Terriers
is it will not bark or make any noise when fighting - even when taking
on a fox or badger in the lair.  Physically this breed is very heavily boned
for its size.  It also has a large chest to house a set of lungs that are very
large for a dog of only 14 inches and 35 pounds.  I feel that both of these
physical features play a role in the unique nutritional requirements of
this breed.
Food supplies native to this breed would have been the ground animals
it hunted.  Both ocean and stream fish were a staple in its diet.  The grain
and vegetable crops native to Wicklow County Ireland would have
included barley, oats, and potato.
For the Glen of Imaal Terrier I recommend foods that are high in the
protein from a fish source blended with barley, oats, potato, and a little
beef.  However, you should avoid feeding a Glen of Imaal Terrier
anything you would not find in an Irish Stew, such as white rice, soy
beans, beets, or avocado.
GLEN OF IMAAL TERRIER
124
Weight Standards: m - 65 to 75 lbs., f - 60 to 70 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 23 to 24 inches, f - 21.5 to 22.5 inches
Coat: double, soft and long with mild feathering
Common Ailments: dysplasia, congenital eye defects, hot spots
The Golden Retriever's origins cannot be documented.  The theories
are as numerous as the breed itself.  One theory claims the Golden
Retriever originated in Russia and was then later taken to England where
it developed into the breed of dog we know today.
The Golden is one of six breeds I know of that produces oils through the
skin and no skin dander.  This makes it an ideal breed for people with
allergies to the skin dander produced by most of the other breeds.  Since
the Golden produces skin oil and not skin dander, it is very important
that they receive the proper amount and balance of dietary fatty acids.
When the proper balance of fatty acids (linolenic, linoleic, and oleic) are
present in its daily dietary intake, the Golden only produces the
arachidonic acid its body requires to make the skin oils.  The proper
source and balance of these fatty acids can change a dry, dull and brittle
coat into one that would make any Golden Retriever proud.  The best
sources of fatty acids for this breed of dog are linseed oil and cold
pressed corn oil or wheat germ oils.  Soy oil coat conditioners should be
avoided.
Wherever the Golden Retriever originated, nutrient sources in the
regions must have included wheat, corn, poultry, and limited amounts
of beef.  A blend of these sources makes up the ideal base diet for this
breed.  Foods this breed should avoid would contain ocean fish, soy,
oats, beet pulp, or white rice.
GOLDEN RETRIEVER
125
Weight Standards: m - 55 to 80 lbs., f - 45 to 75 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 24 to 27 inches, f - 23 to 26 inches
Coat: long, smooth, double with very light feathering
Common Ailments: dysplasia and hot spots
The Gordon Setter is the only breed of dog called "Setter" originating
in Scotland.  The Duke of Gordon developed this specific breed at the
kennels on his estate.  He developed it to be both a working and hunting
dog.  They herded sheep and pointed to feathered game for sportsmen.
This combination was ideal for gentlemen who needed a working dog
for most of the week and a good hunting companion for the week end.
The Gordon Setter has a special need for a high fat content diet.  This
need for additional dietary fat is especially high when the setter is
working or when it is under stress.  Large quantities of water must
accompany the additional dietary fat intake during these times.  A sure
sign that the dog requires additional fat in its dietary intake is a brittle
coat.  When the Gordon has the proper amount of fat in the diet, its coat
is very soft.  The best sources of fats for this breed are vegetable or
poultry fats. The worst source of fat for the Gordon Setter is beef fat.
The Gordon Setter's native environment in Scotland provided food
sources of potatoes, wheat, corn, and poultry of the wild game variety.
Therefore, I recommend a blend of foods that are high in their
carbohydrate-to-protein ratio as the ideal diet for the Gordon Setter.  The
blend I recommend would contain potatoes, wheat, corn, and poultry.
Conversely, I feel the worst blend would be white rice, soy, beef, or
horse meat and their by-products.
GORDON SETTER
126
Weight Standards: m - 135 to 150 lbs., f - 120 to 135 lbs.
Height Standards: m - over 30 inches, f - over 28 inches
Coat: short, smooth with a harsh texture,
 in colors of brindle, fawn, harlequin or solid black
Common Ailments: bloat, torsion, dysplasia, spinal disc problems
The Great Dane, which is called the "Apollo of Dogs", developed in
Germany where they were used as a hunter and a guard dog.  Their
original name was "The Deutsche Dogge", and at one time they were
known to be so ferocious that the breed was considered vicious.  They
also had earned a reputation for being an excellent war dog.  They could
both pack gear and protect their masters backside from attack during a
battle.  I note that the "breed trait" of being ferocious is no longer
evident.  Today the Dane is (pound for pound) one of the most gentle and
loving of the species canine.
This is a breed that in its native environment is still being fed a diet of
high fiber (whole rolled oats, cabbage, etc.) and high protein foods.  I
have seen fewer instances of bloat or torsion reported in its native
Germany than I have in America.   Therefore, for this special breed I
recommend commercial foods that are very high in their fiber content.
The food sources found in the native environment of the Dane included
high fiber whole oats, cabbage, and rye.  The meats were wild boar, deer,
and a lean beef from a dairy cattle.  I recommend a food for today's Dane
that contains beef, whole oats, rye, and potato.  I also recommend that
you avoid feeding a commercial food with any soy, white rice, or fish
to a Great Dane.
GREAT DANE
127
Weight Standards: m - 100 to 125 lbs., f - 90 to 100 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 27 to 32 inches, f - 25 to 29 inches
Coat: double with heavy undercoat, long soft solid white top coat
Common Ailments:  dysplasia, hot spots and skin rashes,
liver and kidney failure
The Great Pyrenees developed in the Pyrenees mountains, on the
border between France and Spain.  This breed is one of the oldest
domesticated breeds of dog with a history that has been traced to the
Bronze Age (3500 to 4000 BC.).  At that time it was used in its native
environment for much the same purpose that it is used today; that of
living in harmony with large flocks of sheep while protecting them from
the bears and wolves.  They possess great stamina, a keen sense of
danger, and good fighting abilities.
Due to its growing popularity, the Great Pyrenees Club of America has
a code of ethics clause.  Members will guarantee any puppy they sell to
be free from hereditary defects to protect this breed.  I applaud these
people in their efforts to provide us with good and healthy dogs.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been from their Pyrenees
Mountain environment.  The meat sources contained a very high fat to
protein ratio.  Any grains or vegetables would have been the type that
could grow in a short season and rocky soil.
For the Great Pyrenees I recommend foods of lamb, poultry, wheat, and
potato.  It must have a high fat content.  I also recommend you avoid
feeding a food that contains soy, beef or beef by-products, yellow corn,
or beet pulp to this breed.
GREAT PYRENEES
128
Weight Standards: m/f - 120 to 140 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 25 to 28 inches
Coat: double, thick long topcoat, black with bronze & white
Common Ailments: dysplasia, bloat, hot spots,
kidney and liver problems
The Greater Swiss Mountain Dog developed in the mountains of
Switzerland in Central Europe.  They have a history that dates from the
time of Julius Caesar.  They were draft dogs, herding dogs, watch dogs,
and even battle companions.  Nicknamed the "Swissy", it is one of four
breeds known as the Swiss Sennenhunde  (the four being the Swissy,
Bernese Mountain Dog, Entlebucher, and Appenzeller).  The Greater
Swiss Mountain Dog is a very thick boned and heavily muscled animal,
which can develop slower than other breeds.  The thick bones and heavy
muscles contribute to this breed's unique nutritional requirements.
Therefore, the Swissy should be kept on a diet that will provide the
proper nutrients for the development of bone and muscle tissue until
fully developed.  This can be long after the breed has reached its exterior
adult body size.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been from the mountain
environment of the Swiss Alps.  These consisted of mutton, poultry,
goat, goat dairy products, and grains of wheat, oat, and corn.
For the Greater Swiss Mountain Dog I recommend foods that contain
poultry, lamb, wheat, oats, and corn.  However, I feel you should avoid
feeding a food that contains any ocean fish, citrus fruits or avocado,
white rice, or soy products to this breed.
GREATER SWISS MOUNTAIN DOG
129
Weight Standards: m - 65 to 75 lbs., f - 60 to 65 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 27 to 28 inches
Coat: short, single, smooth
Common Ailments: bloat, PRA, circulatory problems
The Greyhound originated in Egypt as a hunting dog and companion
to the Pharaoh and his royal family. This Egyptian desert dog is depicted
inside the pyramids of many Pharaohs.  Most of us know of this breed
because of its performance at the race track.  However, it should be noted
they make wonderful family companions, as long as they have the room
to exercise.
The Greyhound has unique circulatory problems directly related to its
requirement for vitamins A, D, E, the mineral Selenium, and the trace
mineral complex. The protein to fat requirements of this breed are very
low when compared to other breeds of the same body weight.  The fat
should come from a vegetable or poultry source since those have the best
balance for the Greyhound.
Meat sources from their native area would have consisted of rabbit,
pork, poultry, and goat. Fruits would have included the fig, grape,
orange, and olive. Grains were barley, wheat, and a form of brown rice.
There is no commercial food blend available in the U.S. that I would
recommend for this breed.  I applaud the trainers and handlers of the
racing kennels for their efforts to make their own dog food.  Food
sources I think should be avoided by Greyhounds are beef by-products,
soy, yellow corn, or beet pulp.
GREYHOUND
130
Weight Standards: m - 45 to 60 lbs., f - 40 to 55 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 19 to 21 inches
Coat: short and smooth in white with black and tan
Common Ailments:  kidney failure, hot spots
The Harrier that we know today developed in England in the early
1200's and has one of the cleanest family tree records of any hound.
Since there is an occasional puppy born with unusual coat coloring,
there is a debate about the origins of the breed prior to the time records
were kept on the first pack of Harriers.  For five centuries we know this
breed's breeding was confined to one pack, owned by a single family.
The Virginia Colonial hunters used this excellent scent hound for
tracking bear, boar and deer before we became a nation.  They work well
in a pack when hunting and have gained a good deal of respect from
hunters in the southern states for their good nose and tenacity.
Native food supplies that were available to this breed in their developing
years would have been meats from fox, deer, and boar.  Primary
vegetables were the low ground type and grains were rye and wheat.
For the Harrier I recommend foods that are a blend of horse meat, beef,
and small amounts of poultry blended with wheat, oats, and yellow corn.
Since you may not be able to find this recommended blend in any one
commercial food, you may need to blend two foods to achieve this mix.
I also recommend that you avoid feeding a Harrier any fish, beet pulp,
soy, or white rice.
HARRIER
131
Weight Standards: m/f - 45 to 75 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 25 to 29 inches
Coat: short with a course texture in solid white or white with red
Common Ailments:  hot spots and skin rashes
The Ibizan Hound originated in the desert regions of the Middle East.
The Earliest records we have of the Ibizan Hound come from the tomb
of the Egyptian Pharaoh Tutankhamen.  This breed was also known as
the Galgo  during the time of the Pharaohs.  Egyptian gods and mortals
such as Cleopatra considered it a favorite.  Phoenician traders were
responsible for this dog's likeness being placed on the Roman coins.
They are also given credit for transporting this breed to the island of
Ibiza in the early 8th century.  There, this breed remained isolated from
other dog breeds and was bred pure for centuries.  It is from this small
Balearic island that we have today's Ibizan Hound.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been from their 8th
century Balearic island home.  They would have consisted of fish,
rabbit, and goat meat with grains of wheat and a type of brown rice.
For the Ibizan Hound I recommend foods that are a blend of poultry,
lamb, brown rice and wheat.  However, you should avoid feeding an
Ibizan Hound any food that contains soy, beef, horse meat, potato, or
white rice.
IBIZAN HOUND
132
Weight Standards: m - 70 lbs.; f - 60 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 27 inches; f - 25 inches
Coat: Long, flat, silky coat with feathering, Mahogany
Common Ailments: hip dysplasia, bloat, PRA
The Irish Setter's origins remain a mystery.  We do know they became
popular in Ireland soon after they first appeared there a few centuries ago
and that most of today's Irish Setters can trace their linage to Irish
kennels.  They became popular because their performance as upland
bird dogs was unparalleled.  They are the tallest of the setters and one
of the most handsome.
The Irish Setter requires large amounts of fats, as well as a high
carbohydrate to protein ratio in its base diet.  It will produce a very
healthy and shiny coat when the proper balance of fat-to-carbohydrate-
to-protein is provided.  The source of the fat in the Irish Setter's diet is
very important.  The best sources would be from vegetable sources and
the worst would be from animal sources, such as beef fat. This is due to
the different sources of fats containing different amounts and ratios of
the alpha-Linolenate family.
When feeding the Irish Setter, just think of the ingredients for grandma's
Irish Stew.  These ingredients represent the food supplies found in
Ireland for centuries.  I think the best food blend for the Irish Setter
should contain potatoes and other vegetables such as carrots, rye grains,
with meat sources of lamb and poultry.   Conversely, I think the least
desirable blend would contain horse meat or beef and their by-products,
with soy, fish, or rice.
IRISH SETTER
133
Weight Standards: m - 27 lbs., f - 25 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 18 inches
Coat: short with a soft undercoat and wiry top coat in shades of red
Common Ailments: kidney and liver disorders
The Irish Terrier was once known as the Irish Sporting Terrier in its
native Ireland.  The group of dogs collectively labeled the "Irish
Sporting Terrier" included a rather mixed looking group of dogs with no
breed standards.  Breeders established standards after a show in Dublin,
Ireland, in 1875, and the dogs conforming to these standards became the
forefathers of today's Irish Terrier.  The first records of this breed
indicate they were a ratter and an upland game bird dog.  They are very
quick and agile and can catch a rabbit on the run or a woodcock before
it can take wing.
Native food supplies of Ireland for this breed would have been the
potato, wheat, rye, flax, game birds of the woodcock variety, fish, and
mutton.  So when considering the food for this breed, remember the
ingredients that would have gone into Irish Stew.  These ingredients
represent the food supplies that have been in Ireland for centuries.  Also
remember the number of rice paddies you can find in Ireland is zero.
For the Irish Terrier I recommend foods containing potatoes, wheat, rye
poultry, mutton (lamb), and fish.  I also recommend that you avoid
feeding an Irish Terrier any white rice, brown rice, avocado, or soy
products.
IRISH TERRIER
134
Weight Standards: m - 55 to 65 lbs., f - 45 to 58 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 22 to 24 inches, f - 21 to 23 inches
Coat: dense undercoat with a curly top coat, in liver color
Common Ailments: dysplasia, ear infections
The Irish Water Spaniel developed on the north coast of Ireland as a
water fowl retriever.  Its history dates back to the 7th or 8th century.  This
is the tallest of the breeds called "Spaniel."  The breed standards were
established in 1850 after the breed gained in popularity in its native land,
and local dog fanciers started promoting it.  This dog is a natural
retriever with a waterproof coat that makes it ideal for fetching birds
brought down in extremely cold water.  The Irish Water Spaniel is very
territorial and protective of children given to its capable care, and yet it
has a tendency to be a runner.  This "running" characteristic may be to
satisfy its curiosity more than to "get away from."  This breed is very
inquisitive, determined, and strong.
Native food supplies for this breed would have included those found in
both Spain and the Northern Irish Lake Country.   These included fish,
waterfowl, potato, and grains of flax, rye, and oat.
For the Irish Water Spaniel I recommend foods high in their
carbohydrates, with a blend of poultry, fresh water fish, potato, oats, and
wheat.  However, you should avoid feeding a special breed like this any
soy, white rice, avocado, beef, or horse meat products.
IRISH WATER SPANIEL
135
Weight Standards: m - over 120 lbs., f - over 105 lbs.
Height Standards: m - above 32 inches, f - above 30 inches
Coat: rough, short coat, gray, fawn, or brindle
Common Ailments: dysplasia, bloat & gastrointestinal problems
The Irish Wolfhound is one of the tallest of the breeds and one of the
oldest.  Its history can be traced to pre-Christian times when the Legions
of Rome  used it as a war dog.  The Irish Wolfhound originated near
Rome and was then brought to Ireland during an invasion by Roman
troops.  In Ireland it gained in popularity and is now their national dog.
They are coveted for their hunting prowess; particularly for the pursuit
and take-down of the Irish Elk, an animal that can be six feet tall at the
shoulders.
Nutrients of the Irish Wolfhound's native areas were very high in
carbohydrates and fiber from grain sources.  The best carbohydrate food
sources for the Irish Wolfhound should come from wheat, barley, and
potato products. Foods with carbohydrates from sources like white rice
seem to be difficult for this breed to assimilate.  Irish Wolfhounds also
have a lower overall protein requirement per Kg. of body weight when
compared to most other breeds of dogs. Therefore, I recommend that the
bulk of energy producing ingredients in this breed's diet come from fat
carbohydrate sources.
My recommendation is for food with a high fiber, carbohydrate, and fat
percentages.  Horse meat seems to provide the best amino acid profile
for this breed's requirements. I also think the Irish Wolfhound should
avoid foods that contain fish, poultry, white rice, and soy.
IRISH WOLFHOUND
136
Weight Standards: m/f - average 9 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 13 to 15 inches
Coat: short and satin textured, any color
except tan combined with another color
Common Ailments: temperature sensitive, heart and
circulatory problems, respiratory ailments and gum disease
The Italian Greyhound originated in Italy.  Roman soldiers brought it
to Rome in 91 - 88 B.C..  Here it became popular and was given its
modern day name.  The first written word referring to this dog was
uncovered in the ruins of Pompeii and was written on a plaque that read
"Cave Canem ", which translates "don't step on our small dog ."  This
breed has experienced a decline in its life expectancy over the last
century, and I blame this on the food that it is now fed.  The history of
the breed shows that the life span for this breed in the 16th and 17th
centuries was from 15 to 17 years.  This longevity is a very rare
occurrence with the breed today.  This breed is also prone to gum disease
and tooth loss, which I also credit to nutritional factors.
Native food supplies for the Italian Greyhound would have included
fruits of the citrus variety, fig and grape, brown rice, rye, wheat, and
meats from hare (rabbit), goat, pork, fish, and lamb.
For the Italian Greyhound I recommend foods that are a blend of fish,
poultry, lamb, brown rice, and avocado.  However, I also recommend
that you avoid feeding an Italian Greyhound any beef, horse meat,
potato, beet pulp, or soy.
ITALIAN GREYHOUND
137
Weight Standards: m - over 7 lbs., f - under 7 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 12 inches
Coat: long fine overcoat in white with brown or black
Common Ailments: gum disease, respiratory, kidney & liver failure
The Japanese Chin developed in an area close to Peking, China.  It was
taken to the island empire of Japan in the 10th century where it became
a favorite of the Emperor.  It was often given as a ceremonial gift to
royalty or visiting dignitaries.  When Commodore Perry arrived in
Japan he was given several Chins.  In turn he gave his queen a breeding
pair.  She helped make this breed popular in England.  Queen Alexandria
was often painted with these small dogs in her lap or in her immediate
surroundings.
This breed has a profuse coat, which is a nutritional factor in the Chin's
protein requirements.  To grow and maintain its thick and luxurious coat
this breed can require a higher amount of protein in its food than breeds
with less coat per pound of body weight.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been of the Mandarin
Chinese variety with a later influence from the ocean fishing industry of
Japan.  These supplies would have included pork, fish, poultry with a
high fat content, rice, soy products, and green's.
For the Japanese Chin I recommend foods that consist of fish, poultry,
white rice, yellow corn, beet pulp, and soy.  I also recommend you avoid
feeding a Japanese Chin any white potato, avocado, oats, beef, or horse
meat.
JAPANESE CHIN
138
Weight Standards: m - 40 lbs., f - 35 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 18 inches, f - 17 inches
Coat: double, long stand-out top coat, silver gray shading to black
Common Ailments: hot spots and skin rash
The Keeshond, once known as the Dutch Barge Dog, originated in
Holland which  is now a province of the Netherlands.  It served as a
companion and watchdog in villages, farms, and on the canal barges.
Other uses for this versatile breed of dog included hunter, herder, and
draft dog.
One physical feature of the Keeshond that affects its nutritional
requirements is its continuous shedding.   This year round shedding
creates a need for a high protein diet.  I recommend dietary protein
contents as high as 30% in this breed's food, as long as the protein comes
from the proper sources and contains the proper balance of amino acids.
The primary food sources in the native environment of the Keeshond's
low land Holland were ocean fish, dairy products, rice, beets, and
poultry.
For the Keeshond I recommend blending fish and poultry protein foods
that have high fatty acid contents.  The foods should also have a low
carbohydrate to protein ratio.  The carbohydrates should be from a rice
or beet pulp source.  Conversely, I believe the worst food blend for a
Keeshond would contain yellow corn, soy, horse meat, or lamb.
KEESHOND
139
Weight Standards: m - 33 to 40 lbs., f - slightly less
Height Standards: m - 18 to 19.5 inches, f - 17.5 to 19 inches
Coat: silky textured and wavy, kept short and is blue in color
Common Ailments: skin rashes and coat pigmentation problems
The Kerry Blue Terrier, whose coat has a unique blue coloring, can
trace its origins and name to County Kerry, Ireland.  This county houses
both Macgillycuddy's Errks and Dingle Bay and is primarily known for
its fishing industry, cattle ranching, and potato farming.  County Kerry,
Ireland is next to County Cork on the Southwestern tip of Ireland, where
it juts into the North Atlantic Ocean.  The breed of dog that came from
this area was an all-purpose dog. It was first used by its human
companions to control the vermin population, hunt small game, and be
a guard dog.
The Kerry Blue is a breed that does not shed its coat.  This feature alone
can make its nutritional requirements different from breeds of the same
size that are heavy shedders.  (See the Keeshond of Holland).
Native food supplies common to this breed's County Kerry Ireland
home were rodents, beef cattle, ocean fish, and vegetables of potato,
carrot, and cabbage.
For the Kerry Blue Terrier I recommend a blend of beef and fish with
cabbage, carrots, and potato.  You may not be able to find this
combination and have to blend two or three ingredients into a commercial
food.  I also feel you should avoid feeding a Kerry Blue any citrus fruit,
avocado, soy, or white rice.
KERRY BLUE TERRIER
140
Weight Standards: m - 95 lbs., f - 80 lbs.
Height Standards: m - over 25.5 inches, f - over 23.5 inches
Coat: dense undercoat with a long "corded" top coat in solid white
Common Ailments:  hip dysplasia, liver and kidney disorders
The Komondor developed in Hungary from dogs first brought to the
area by Russian Magyars in the 10th century.  The Komondor is quite
muscular with a unique muscle to body fat ratio.  This physical
characteristic gives them more stamina than many other breeds of the
same body weight.  This is due to the muscle tissue having greater
energy storing capacity than equal amounts of body fat.  The Komondor's
coat is also unique for two reasons:  most obvious is the coat's corded
appearance; however, it also has a type of fiber that can take days to dry
when wet.  Both physical characteristics of muscle to fat ratio and coat
type are factors contributing to the Komondor's unique nutritional
requirements.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been from both the steeps
of Russia and later Hungary's low land farm belt.  These area's are the
bread basket of Europe and produce wheat, oats, barley, corn, sugar
beets, hogs, and beef.
For the Komondor I recommend foods that are a blend of beef, beet pulp,
yellow corn, oats, and wheat.  The food should be high in its fiber content
as well.  I also recommend you avoid feeding a Komondor any foods
containing soy, white rice, ocean fish, or avocado.
KOMONDOR
141
Weight Standards: m - average 80 lbs., f - average 75 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 26 inches, f - somewhat less
Coat: long top coat that is slightly wavy in white only
Common Ailments:  dysplasia
The Kuvasz developed in the mountains of Hungary where it borders
Czechoslovakia.  This breed guarded noblemen during their journeys
when it first appeared in this area in 1100 A.D..  It was later used to guard
and herd flocks of sheep, and to hunt wild game.  This dog has an
unusually high instinct to protect children or helpless elderly.  This trait
makes them wonderful family pets.  It is an extremely gentle dog for its
size, yet it is also a strong willed herding dog.  The Kuvasz's herding
instinct is often used on those they consider  in their care.  They may take
grandma or a small child to a place other than where they want to go.  It
is sometimes difficult for some people to remember that the Kuvasz
does this "herding" out of love and devotion.
Native meat supplies for this breed's development would have come
from their mountain environment and therefore contained high amounts
of body fat.  The main meat sources would have been mutton, goat, wolf,
bear, and venison.  The carbohydrates of their diet would have come
from oats and vegetables, such as corn and beets grown in the short
summer months.
For the Kuvasz I recommend foods with both the fat and protein sources
from meats like mutton or poultry and not grain.  You should avoid
feeding a Kuvasz any foods that contain soy products (including soy
"coat conditioners"), white rice, or salt water fish.
KUVASZ
142
Weight Standards: m - 60 to 75 lbs., f - 55 to 70 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 22.5 to 24.5 inches, f - 21.5 to 23.5 inches
Coat: short, straight, hard, and dense; in black, yellow, or chocolate
Common Ailments: hip dysplasia, hot spots
The Labrador Retriever originated in Newfoundland and further
developed in England.  Besides being a famous gun dog, the Lab has
become a renowned police and war dog and a trusted guide dog for the
blind.  The Labrador Retriever is also only one of the few breeds known
to produce an oil through the pores of the skin.  It will develop a very dry
and brittle coat in a very short period of time when the entire Linoleic
acid group is not present in its daily diet.  The Linoleic acid group consist
of three fatty acids: Oleic, Linolenic and Linoleic.  The best commercial
sources of these fatty acids for the Labrador Retriever are fish oil,
linseed oil, or cold pressed wheat germ oil.
In Newfoundland the primary food sources were caribou, fish, and
whale fats.  In England the food sources were poultry, fish, wheat, and
dairy products.  The combined effect of foods from these two areas
resulted in the development of a breed requiring a diet low in
carbohydrates yet high in fats.  The source of the fat is also important;
the Labrador Retriever has a difficult time assimilating beef fat but
thrives on poultry fat, fish oil, or vegetable fats.
For the Labrador Retriever I recommend foods that contain fish,
poultry, lamb, and green vegetables.  However, for this breed I suggest
you avoid foods that are a blend of beef, beets, corn, and soy.
LABRADOR RETRIEVER
143
Weight Standards: m/f - 17 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 13.5 to 15.5 inches, f - 12.5 to 14 inches
Coat: a short and wiry double coat in black to Wheaton colors
Common Ailments:  hot spots and skin rashes
The Lakeland Terrier developed in England's Cumberland County, a
county that borders both Scotland and the Irish Sea.  This county has
some of the highest elevations in England, and it was from the heather
moors of this region that the Lakeland Terrier originated.  It was also
from the many lakes in this region that the Lakeland came to be named.
This breed was a working terrier.  Its job was to kill fox that preyed on
the farmers' new lambs and poultry.  It also controlled the vermin
population that lived in the storage bins and destroyed the grain.  The
Lakeland Terrier is tough, brave and agile, with a slender body that
enables it to follow its quarry through narrow crevices.  The Lakeland
is also a very hardy dog that seems to adapt faster to different food
sources than many other breeds.
Native food supplies for this breed would have included lamb, poultry,
hare, rodent, fish, and fox with high carbohydrate starchy vegetables
and grains.  Vegetables and grains would have been the potato, cabbage,
carrot, oats, and rye grown in the podsols/bog type of soil of their heather
moors homeland.
For the Lakeland Terrier I recommend foods that are a blend of wheat,
oats, lamb, poultry, and potato.  However, I feel you should avoid
feeding a Lakeland any soy, avocado, or other highly acidic fruits, white
rice, or horse meat.
LAKELAND TERRIER
144
Weight Standards: m/f - 16 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 10 to 11 inches, f - slightly smaller
Coat: Long, dense straight coat, any color
Common Ailments: kidney ailments
The Lhasa Apso originated in the Himalayan Mountains of Tibet as the
temple dog of the Dali Llama.  Its primary function was that of a
watchdog inside the palace.  Its intelligence, acute hearing, and natural
instinct for identifying friend from foe made the Lhasa uniquely suited
for this role.
The primary meats available as a food of Tibet would have been
domesticated yak, mountain goat, bear, or lama.  These meats have
unique amino acid profiles when compared to meats usually used in
commercial all-breed dog foods within the U.S.A.  Their native home
environment also produced barley and rice crops, which are grains high
in fiber and carbohydrates.  I feel that both of these grain crops
influenced the nutritional requirements of the Lhasa Apso.  They still
require a diet that is higher in carbohydrates and fiber than many other
breeds of dog of the same body size.
Foods that the Lhasa Apso can use blend poultry, fish, rice, soy and
wheat.  I also recommend you avoid feeding a Lhasa Apso foods with
sources that contain beef, yellow corn, beet pulp, or white potatoes.
LHASA APSO
145
Weight Standards: m/f - under 7 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 5 inches
Coat: a long straight top coat, fine textured in solid white
Common Ailments: slipped stifle, gum disease, respiratory
The Maltese developed on the islands of Malta.  These islands are a
small chain in the Mediterranean Sea between the coast of Sicily and the
coast of Africa.  The Maltese were a favorite of the Greeks.  Often these
dogs were a subject for Greek artists during the 5th century, and tombs
were erected for deceased pet Maltese.  The Maltese dogs of Malta look
the same today as they appear in portraits painted during the time of the
Apostle Paul.  The soil of the island of Malta is comprised of limestone,
and the only fresh water comes from wells drilled into the limestone.  I
mention this because this soil's mineral content is credited with giving
the Maltese breed a unique set of requirements for the mineral complex.
You will know if this breed is receiving the proper minerals in its diet
if its coat remains white and the eye drainage does not stain its face coat.
When this breed is receiving the wrong food sources of minerals its coat
yellows, and the face coat has a red streaking under the eyes.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been goat, fish, poultry,
and highly acidic fruits such as the orange, grape, fig, and avocado.  The
carbohydrates would have been supplied by grains of brown rice and
barley.
For the Maltese I recommend foods containing salt water fish, poultry,
and lamb blended with brown rice, avocado, and wheat.  You should
avoid feeding a Maltese any sulfate minerals; as well as soy, horse meat,
beef, or beet pulp.
MALTESE
MANCHESTER TERRIER (Standard & Toy)
146
Weight Standards: Standard: m/f - 13 to 22 lbs.; Toy: m/f - under 12 lbs.
Height Standards: Standard: m/f - average 17 inches; Toy: m/f - 12 inches
Coat: both sizes have short and smooth coats in black with tan
Common Ailments:  skin rashes, hot spots
The Manchester Terrier developed north of the township of
Manchester, England.  Originally called the Black and Tan, it was
renamed Manchester Terrier in honor of a single breeder who lived in
the township of Manchester, England.  This one breeder took this terrier
from the bloody sport of rat killing and made it a household pet.  This
breed is very quick and agile, a trait that made it good in the rat pit.  For
example, one of these dogs killed 100 rats in just 6 minutes and 13
seconds!  The Toy Manchester Terrier was developed as a direct
descendant of the larger Manchester Terrier by breeders who wanted a
smaller variety of this breed.  Both sizes of Manchester Terrier are very
lean breeds of dog, having very little body fat.  This body fat to muscle
ratio is a factor in their nutritional requirements.  They will do well on
a food with a low fat content and can be taken off puppy formulas at an
earlier age than many other breeds.
Native food supplies would have included rodents, rabbit, beef, wheat,
oats, sugar beet, and ground vegetables.
For both sizes of Manchester Terrier I recommend foods that are low in
fats yet high in carbohydrates and fiber.  The ingredients I recommend
are horse meat with oats, wheat, potato, and beet pulp.  However, for
these dogs I feel you should avoid feeding any food containing soy, rice,
avocado, or yellow corn.
MASTIFF (English & Neapolitan)
147
Weight Standards: m - average 180 lbs., f - average 170 lbs.
Height Standards: m - over 30 inches, f - over 27.5 inches
Coat: short, dense in texture, colors of fawn, brindle or apricot
Common Ailments:  dysplasia, bloat, hot spots
The English Mastiff developed in Great Britain prior to the Roman
invasion in 55 B.C..  When the Romans invaded England, they were
introduced to an impressively courageous and loyal dog.  They brought
selective breeding stock back to Italy, which in turn became known as
the Neapolitan Mastiff.  It was used in the Roman Circus to fight lions
and bears.  There is one story that tells of a single Mastiff fighting a bull
elephant, AND WINNING!
Native food supplies for the English Mastiff would have been venison,
cattle, wheat, oats, and high carbohydrate sugar beet and potato.  The
Neapolitan Mastiff was then exposed to more vegetable oils while
retaining an exposure to high carbohydrate foods from rye and brown
rice sources.
Both the English and Neapolitan variety are nutritionally different from
a Tibetan Mastiff, a breed first appearing in Chinese literature around
1121 BC.  For both the English and Neapolitan Mastiffs I recommend
foods high in carbohydrates and fiber.  Their foods should contain beef,
wheat, and potato.  With the Neapolitan Mastiff you also should include
more fatty vegetable oils and some brown rice and avocado.  With both
you should avoid poultry, lamb, or soy.
MINIATURE PINSCHER
148
Weight Standards: m/f - 9 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 10 to 12.5 inches
Coat: short and smooth textured, in reds or blacks with tan
Common Ailments:  hot spots, skin rashes, pigmentation
problems, liver and kidney failure
The Miniature Pinscher originated in Germany where its history goes
back over many hundreds of years.  It was originally a barnyard ratter.
It is often called the Reh Pinscher  in Germany because its appearance
is similar to a native species of miniature deer.  They are called the
Miniature Pinscher in the U.S.A. because their appearance is very
similar to a "miniaturized Doberman Pinscher."  However, there is no
genetic relationship between these two breeds.  The Min Pin is wonderful
with children and in a family environment.  It is also very territorial and
possessive.  Therefore, it makes an excellent family watch dog.  This
breed is small and has a sleek appearance, yet it is very "thick boned."
This characteristic gives it a different requirement for bone building
minerals per pound of body weight than other "small" breeds that are
more fragile or "thin boned."
Food supplies from this breed's native environment would have been
sugar beet, potato, cabbage, and meats from pork, venison, and rodents.
For the Miniature Pinscher I recommend foods that are a blend of horse
meat, beef, wheat, potatoes, yellow corn, and beet pulp.  However, you
should avoid feeding a commercial dog food that contains any ocean
fish, soy, or rice to this breed.
149
Weight Standards: m/f 14 to 17 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f 12 to 14 inches
Coat: hard & wiry in solid black or salt & pepper or black & silver
Common Ailments: cataracts, kidney problems
The Miniature Schnauzer developed in the farmlands of Germany.  It
was bred down to its present size by selectively breeding a larger variety
of Schnauzer with other smaller German breeds.  Which breeds these
were has been the topic of many a lively debate amongst Miniature
Schnauzer fanciers. Whatever these breeds were, today's Miniature
Schnauzer has been in existence since the 15th century.  It retained the
Schnauzer appearance, with the abundant whiskers and leg furnishings,
but developed its own charming personality.  This combination of good
looks and personality made it one of the most popular miniature breeds.
There are very few breeds of dog that do not shed their coat.  The
Miniature Schnauzer is one of these rare nonshedders.  This feature
makes it an ideal pet for people with allergies and also gives it different
dietary requirement for hair production than those breeds that are
shedders.
Native food supplies found in this breed's homeland would have been
beet pulp, wheat, potatoes, cabbage, and meats from rodents and beef
cattle.  Therefore, for the Miniature Schnauzer I recommend  foods that
have a blend of horse meat, beef, potato, wheat, and beet pulp.  However,
I also feel you should avoid feeding a Miniature Schnauzer any soy bean
products, avocado, ocean fish, white rice, or brown rice.
MINIATURE SCHNAUZER
NEWFOUNDLAND
150
Weight Standards: m - average 150 lbs., f - average 120 lbs.
Height Standards: m - average 28 inches, f - average 26 inches
Coat: double, flat topcoat, black, black & white, bronze, or gray
Common Ailments: dysplasia, skin rashes, hot spots
 and pigmentation problems
The Newfoundland originated in the Canadian province of
Newfoundland as the companion and co-worker of coastal fisherman.
It is only one of six breeds of dog I know of with webbed feet.
Nutritional studies of the Newfoundland showed a very high requirement
for the fat soluble vitamins A-D-E per kilogram of body weight.
However, for this breed these vitamins must come from the proper
source.  For example, Newfoundland dogs show a very low assimilation
rate for vitamin A derived from beta carotene, usually found in carrots
or vegetables.  Yet vitamin A from fish liver oil or in a palmitate form
has a much higher rate of assimilation for the Newfoundland.
Nutrients in the Newfoundland's native environment consisted primarily
of cold water white fish such as cod, halibut, and herring.  Any exposure
to meat would have been from caribou (which has an amino acid profile
similar to that of horse meat) and bear (which has an amino acid profile
similar to that of pork).
For a Newfoundland I recommend you look for food blends containing
fish, pork, poultry, and lamb.  The food should have a high fat content.
I also advise you to avoid foods composed of beef and soy or any food
having a protein content over 30 percent or a high fiber content from
oats, beets, or wood pulp.
NORFOLK TERRIER
151
Weight Standards: m/f - 11 to 12 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 10 inches
Coat: hard textured and wiry in colors of Wheaton, red, tan or black
Common Ailments: kidney ailments, hot spots and skin rashes
The Norfolk Terrier developed in the area surrounding Norfolk,
England.  In this farming community of Mideastern England this breed
earned its keep as a barnyard ratter.  This breed is often confused with
the Norwich Terrier because of their similar appearance.  The only
exterior difference is that the Norfolk has dropped ears and the Norwich
has pricked ears.  However, these two breeds are different and cross
breeding of the two can create problems.  Their genetically different
nutritional requirements create many of these problems.  For example,
the minerals the Norfolk Terrier can best assimilate are not the same as
the minerals the Norwich can best assimilate.
The native environment for the Norfolk would have provided food
supplies from the farmlands.  These would have included beef cattle,
rodents, beets, wheat, potatoes, and other ground vegetables grown in
the region's bogey marshland soil.
For the Norfolk I recommend foods that are a blend of beef and horse
meat with carbohydrates from potato, wheat, and beets.  I also recommend
you avoid feeding a Norfolk any foods that contain ocean fish, avocado,
white rice, or soy bean products.
152
Weight Standards: m - 55 lbs., f - 48 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 20.5 inches, f - 19.5 inches
Coat: short undercoat & longer topcoat, silver gray black tipped
Common Ailments: cysts, dysplasia and PRA
The Norwegian Elkhound is the National Dog of Norway, where it
developed prior to the time of the Vikings (800-1000 AD).  They
became the working companions of the Vikings and were held in high
esteem by these people who inhabited this cold and rugged land.  Many
excavation sites have uncovered the body of a Norwegian Elkhound
buried next to its Danish master.  They pulled sleds, tended flocks of
reindeer, hunted bear and moose, and guarded the family. The Norwegian
Elkhound is a compact and well muscled dog that reflects the physical
characteristics of a breed developed in a cold rugged country; a country
where stamina, rather than flat land speed, was required to survive.
Native food supplies for this breed would have come from the cold and
rugged country of Norway.  This environment's meat supply came from
land animals such as the reindeer, elk, hare, lynx, wolf or bear, all high
in their body fat content.  The waters of Norway would have produced
an abundance of both the salt water and fresh water fish.
For the Norwegian Elkhound I recommend foods that are high in animal
fats.  The best blends will contain beef and horse meat, with an equal
amount of fish.  Any carbohydrates in the food can come from potato or
wheat, but you should avoid feeding any white rice or soy based food to
this breed.
NORWEGIAN ELKHOUND
153
Weight Standards: m/f - 11 to 12 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 10 inches
Coat: short and rough in texture, red, wheaton or brindle
Common Ailments:  hot spots and skin rashes
The Norwich Terrier developed in Norwich, England, where the Yare
and Wensum rivers join.  These two rivers then travel the short distance
to "Caister on the sea", where the North Sea meets the English Channel.
This confluence of rivers close to the coast provided more of a port city
environment than the barn yard environment of this breed's Norfolk
Terrier ancestors.  It also provided this breed with foods uncommon to
its inland relatives. The Norwich continued to share many similar food
sources with its inland relatives, such as rodents, beef, wheat, oats,
potato, and other farmland products.  However, it was also exposed to
more fish and coastal type foods.  I believe the acclamation to these
coastal foods, with their different mineral sources, is what gave this
breed its requirement for a coastal source of the mineral complex.  For
example, the Norwich Terrier seems to assimilate calcium from oyster
shell better than calcium from bones of animals.
For the Norwich Terrier I recommend foods that are a blend of fish with
horse meats, beef, potato, wheat, and oats.  The mineral sources that are
best for this breed would include sea kelp, oyster shell, and gluconates.
The mineral sources to avoid are from animal bone, sulfate or fumarate
sources.  Other nutrients you should avoid feeding a Norwich are white
rice, soy, avocado, and citrus fruits.
NORWICH TERRIER
154
Weight Standards: m - 45  to 51 lbs., f - 37  to 43 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 19 to 20 inches, f - 1 inch less
Coat: medium top coat over dense undercoat, red or orange colors
Common Ailments:  hot spots and skin rashes
The Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever developed in Yarmouth
County on the Canadian island of Nova Scotia.  Yarmouth County is
located on the southern tip of Nova Scotia and is directly across a narrow
North Atlantic waterway from the eastern coastal states of Maine and
Massachusetts, U.S.A.  The Canadian Kennel Club gave recognition to
this breed in 1945 after it had been bred true for over 200 years.  When
recognized in 1945 its name was changed from the Little River Duck
Dog to its present name.  The "Tolling " part of its present name comes
from a technique it uses when hunting. "Tolling " is an unusual
technique of onshore antics also used by the wild fox to lure game birds
in close for a kill.
Native food supplies for this breed would have included fish of the
ocean varieties, domestic poultry, and wild water fowl.  There are very
few grains native to Nova Scotia and the vegetable crops are limited.
Also, records show livestock ranching was not introduced onto the
island of Nova Scotia until the 1930's.  Since this was long after the
development of this breed of dog, their exposure to beef or pork would
have been limited.
For the Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever I recommend  foods that are
a blend of fish, poultry, and potato with small amounts of wheat and oat.
I also feel you should avoid feeding this breed any soy products, beef or
horse meats, beet pulp, avocado, or rice.
NOVA SCOTIA DUCK TOLLING RETRIEVER
155
Weight Standards: m - average 90 lbs., f - average 75 lbs.
Height Standards: m - over 22 inches, f - slightly less
Coat: long profuse and shaggy, in white with blue-grey,
blue merle, steel-blue-grey, or black
Common Ailments:  hip dysplasia and cataracts
The Old English Sheepdog developed in the western and central
farmland areas of England.  Originally drovers used this breed to herd
livestock to market.  The English government allowed a tax exemption
during the 1700's for dogs the drovers used for their business of herding.
The dogs the drovers used for herding were identified by a docked tail.
The practice of docking a working dog's tail gave the dog a bobtailed
appearance and thus its nickname "the bobtail."  This breed is also a
good upland retriever.  The Old English Sheepdog has a very soft mouth
that is good for retrieving a sportsman's kill without further damaging
it.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been from the western
farmland region of England.  They would have consisted of both mutton
and a lean form of beef blended with the grain crops of wheat, corn, and
oats. This area was also high in its production of beets, potatoes, and
leafy green vegetables.
For the Old English Sheepdog I recommend foods that are a blend of
lamb, beef, beet pulp, wheat, corn, and potato.  However, I feel you
should avoid feeding a "bobtail" any ocean fish, poultry by-products,
avocado, rice or soy.
OLD ENGLISH SHEEPDOG
156
Weight Standards: m - 75 to 115 lbs., f - 65 to 100 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 24 to 27 inches, f - 22 to 26 inches
Coat: shaggy top coat, water resistant, in many colors
Common Ailments:  bloat, dysplasia, and hemophilia
The Otter Hound developed in a region of England known for its many
streams and excellent fishing.  This breed can take a lot of credit for the
good fish population in its homeland streams.  It was this dog's job to
hunt otter that robbed these streams of fish.  Records show that the Otter
Hound has been bred pure in their native England since the 1300's.
Records of this breed also show that its popularity diminished to a point
where there were less than 100 Otter Hounds in all of Britain in 1978.
At that time Hunt members of the English Kennel Club sponsored a law
making this breed a protected species in Britain.  In the U.S.A. this breed
is growing in popularity and has established itself as a fine hunter of the
raccoon, bear, mink, and mountain lion.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been the meats from
otter, badger, fish, and rodent.  Vegetables were of the type that could
grow in the bogey soil of the English region where it developed.
For the Otter Hound I recommend foods that are a blend of fish, poultry,
and horse meats combined with potatoes and wheat.  The food should
have a very high fat content from fish oil or poultry fat.  I also
recommend that you  avoid feeding an Otter Hound any soy products
(this includes soy oil coat conditioners), yellow corn, avocado, or white
rice.
OTTER HOUND
157
Weight Standards: m/f - average 8 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 8 to 11 inches
Coat: long and silky in texture, in any color combined with white
Common Ailments:  slipped stifle, fractures easily
The Papillon has been breeding true to its present day standards for the
last 700 years in France.  There are unsubstantiated rumors that over 700
years ago this breed lived in coastal Italy and came from a dwarf spaniel.
The name "Papillon" in French means "butterfly " and relates to the
breed's ears, which are mobile, erect and fringed with fine hair.  There
is also a white blaze that runs up the forehead of most of these dogs to
further enhance the butterfly appearance.  The Papillon also has what
some may call a "dainty" appearance, but the breed is not at all what
anyone could mistake for dainty.  Historically they were a very active
ratter and have always been a healthy breed.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been the type found on
a 16th century farm in Central France.  The meats would have consisted
of the farms' rodents, poultry, and mutton with crops of in ground
vegetables, wheat, and corn.
For the Papillon I recommend foods that are a blend of poultry, lamb,
potato, wheat, and corn.  However, I feel you should avoid feeding a
Papillon any form of soy products, rice, ocean fish, horse meat, or beef.
PAPILLON
158
Weight Standards: m/f - under 14 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 8 inches
Coat: smooth, long top coat, any color but liver and white
Common Ailments: eye lacerations, respiratory & spinal problems
The Pekingese developed within the Summer Imperial Palace in
Peking, China, during the 8th century.  Ownership of this dog was
restricted to the members of the Chinese Imperial Court.  The Pekinese
was considered to be a good luck charm for their owners.  They were
called by three names in their early years: Lion Dog (because of their
appearance), Sun Dog, and Sleeve Dog (because they could be carried
about in sleeves).  Due to their confinement within the Imperial Palace,
they were unknown to the outside world until the British invasion of the
Palace in 1860.  When the British troops invaded the Palace they found
five of these small dogs guarding the body of their mistress, an imperial
princess.  These five were captured by the invading troops, taken to
England, and are the forefathers of the Pekingese found in this country
today.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been those used in the
kitchens of the Imperial Palace in Peking, China, and would have been
foods of the Mandarin variety.  They would have consisted of meats
from fish, pork, and poultry with greens, beets, rice, and soy products.
For the Pekingese of today I recommend commercial foods that are a
blend of poultry, rice, yellow corn, beet, and soy.  However, I feel you
should avoid feeding a Pekingese any white potatoes, avocado, oats,
beef, or horse meat.
PEKINGESE
159
Weight Standards: m - 30 lbs. or less, f - 28 lbs. or less
Height Standards: m/f - 10 to 12 inches
Coat: short & rough textured, red, red & black, or sable & white
Common Ailments: hot spots, kidney and liver disorders
The Pembroke Welsh Corgi developed in the area of Pembrokeshire,
Wales.  This area is on the southernmost part of Wales where St. Gowans
Head protrudes into the Bristol Channel, close to the North Sea.  This
southern part of Wales has always been known for its mines and
seaports, but it has never been good for growing any crops or farming.
The first records we have of this single breed of dog are dated prior to
1100 A. D..  The records provide evidence that this breed has not
changed since that time.
Native food supplies for the Pembroke Welsh Corgi breed came from
the Southern Coastal Region of Wales and, therefore, were very high in
their mineral content.  Since the mineral concentrations were high in this
breed's native dietary intake, today's Pembroke Welsh Corgi's mineral
requirement remains very high when compared to other breeds.  Also,
the Pembroke Welsh Corgi's dietary minerals of Calcium, Phosphorus,
and Iodine should come from a coastal source.
For the Pembroke Welsh Corgi I recommend  foods that are a blend of
fish, lamb, poultry, potato, beets, carrots, and barley.  However, I feel
you should avoid feeding this breed any horse meat, beef, soy, citrus
fruits, or avocado.
PEMBROKE WELSH CORGI
160
Weight Standards: m/f - average 45 to 55 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 23 to 24 inches, f - 21 to 23 inches
Coat: single, red, copper brown or tan, light flesh color nose
Common Ailments: pigmentation, kidney and liver problems
The Pharaoh Hound originated in the deserts of Egypt where it was
revered by King Tutankhamen over 3000 years ago.  It was then taken
to the Mediterranean Islands of Gazo and Malta by Phoenician traders
over 2000 years ago.  It is from the stock bred true on these Mediterranean
Islands for the last 2000 years that the world has today's Pharaoh
Hounds.  They were originally brought to the islands to control the rabbit
populations and were extremely successful at their job.  In appreciation
for their work, they were declared the National Dog of Malta.  This breed
has many unique characteristics.  Two of the most interesting physical
characteristics are: they have an absence of "doggie odor" when wet, and
they "blush" when excited.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been desert gazelle,
partridge, goat, rabbit, and fish with grains of brown rice and barley.
There were also fruits like the olive and avocado.  The mineral content
of the drinking waters from their Mediterranean islands is also unique.
The islands are comprised of limestone and all drinking water comes
from wells drilled into this rock.
For a Pharaoh Hound I recommend foods that use ocean fish, poultry,
lamb, avocado, wheat, and corn.  However, I feel you should avoid
feeding a Pharaoh Hound any white rice, beef or horse meats, soy, beet
pulp, or potato.
PHARAOH HOUND
161
Weight Standards: m - 55 to 75 lbs., f - 45 to 65 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 25 to 28 inches, f - 23 to 26 inches
Coat: short and dense in liver, lemon, black or orange with white
Common Ailments: hip dysplasia, PRA, and cysts
The Pointer is one breed of dog named for the work it does instead of
its area of origin.  The work at which it has always excelled is the
pointing out of upland feathered game.  This breed developed in Spain
prior to the mid 1600's and was later refined into the Pointer of today by
Major Arkwright in Great Britain.  The Major selectively bred his
kennel of Pointers with breeds like the Setter, Greyhound, and English
Foxhound to develop a dog that was faster, had more stamina, and better
scenting power than the dogs he first received from European hunting
kennels.  The Pointers brought to this country from Great Britain in 1880
set the breed standards for all of today's Pointers.
Native food supplies found in the area of Spain where the first Pointer
originated consisted of goat, fish, pork, poultry (woodcock, chukker,
etc.), brown rice, and citrus fruits.  During its short stay in England
(about 200 years) it was exposed to more cattle and potato types of
vegetables.  This temporary change in available nutrients did not seem
to change the long term dietary requirements of the Pointer.  The Pointer
still does better on brown rice than on English potatoes.
For the Pointer I recommend foods that use a blend of brown rice,
avocado, poultry, and fish.  I also feel you should avoid feeding any soy,
beet pulp, beef and horse meat or their by-products to this breed.
POINTER
162
Weight Standards: m/f - 3 to 7 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 6 inches
Coat: Dense stand-out coat, any color
Common Ailments: slipped stifle
The Pomeranian is a direct descendent of a thirty pound British herding
dog transported to an area of North Central Europe during the Middle
Ages.  There this thirty pound dog was bred with a smaller breed from
Iceland, known as a "Spits dog", and the breed we now know as the
Pomeranian developed.  The three pound dog that developed in this area
is now the smallest member of the Spits family of dogs.  It was for the
Prussian province of Pomerania, where this cross breeding took place,
that the resulting toy sized herding/Spits dog was named.
Pomerania is in an area that is now part of Eastern Germany and
Northwestern Poland.  This historic region stretches along the Baltic
Sea from a line west of Stralsund to the Vistula River in Poland.
Principal crops of the Pomerania area included rye, oats, sugar beets,
barley, and wheat. The meats of this area included beef cattle and pork
as well as fish from both the Baltic Sea and many fresh water rivers.
These food sources gave the Pomeranian its basic nutritional
requirements.
For this breed I recommend a food that is a blend of fish, beef, horse
meat, rye wheat, and beet pulp.  I also recommend that you do not feed
a Pomeranian foods that include poultry, lamb, rice, or soy.
POMERANIAN
163
Weight Standards: m/f - 15 to 17 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 11 to 15 inches
Coat: Long, dense & harsh textured, curly when clipped, any color
Common Ailments:  PRA, eye and ear infections
The Miniature Poodle developed in Northern Germany as a direct
descendant of the Standard Poodle.  It was selectively bred to its present
size in its native Germany during the late 1500's and early 1600's.  It has
been reported that the Miniature Poodle has the keenest scenting ability
of all Poodles, which makes it the best Poodle for finding a subterranean
fungus called the truffle .  Yet the Miniature is very much a water dog
and only one of six dogs known to have webbed feet for swimming.  The
fact  that they are first and foremost a water dog also brought about the
"Poodle Cut", which was originally designed to lighten the dog's coat
while swimming.  This cut provides protective cover for the dog's joints
and vital organs while in cold water.  A multi-purpose dog, today it is
the most popular of the Poodle breeds world-wide.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been from the areas of
the Black Forest to the Baltic Sea in Northern Germany.  These would
have consisted of fish, poultry, pork, venison, potato, cabbage, wheat,
and corn.
For the Miniature Poodle I recommend foods that are a blend of poultry,
fish, wheat, oats, and corn.  However, I also feel you should avoid
feeding any beef, horse meat, soy, beet pulp, or avocado to a Miniature
Poodle.
POODLE (Miniature)
164
Weight Standards: m/f - 45 to 65 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 24 to 26 inches, f - 22 to 24 inches
Coat: Long, dense, harsh coat, curly when clipped, any color
Common Ailments: PRA, eye & ear infections, bloat & dysplasia
The Standard Poodle originated in Northern Germany as a water fowl
retriever.  The breed name, which is shared by all sizes of "Poodle",
comes from the German word puddeln  ("to splash in the water").  The
Standard has the longest history of all Poodles and the family tree for
both the Miniature and Toy can be traced back to the Standard.
The American Kennel Club recognizes the Standard as one part of the
Poodles, with the only difference being size amongst the toy, miniature,
and the Standard.  Nutritionally, however, most Poodle breeders will tell
you there are many differences per pound of body weight between the
Standard Poodle and its relatives.  The Standard Poodle requires protein
with high amounts of the amino acid Phenylalanine.  The Standard also
requires substantial amounts of the mineral complex.  When these are
lacking in the Standard's diet, the most noticeable change usually occurs
in the pigmentation of the skin, gums, and coat.  When these nutrients
are very low, or from the wrong source, the coat can turn orange in color
and lose its luster, and the gums can become very loose around the teeth.
The nutrients of the Northern German area where the Standard Poodle
originated consisted of grains like wheat and corn and meat sources like
fowl, fish, and pork.  Therefore, I recommend foods with a blend of
wheat, corn, fish, and poultry for the Standard Poodle.  I also suggest that
you avoid blends with soy, horse meat, beef by-products, or beet pulp
for the Standard.
POODLE (Standard)
165
Weight Standards: m/f - 6 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 10 inches or under
Coat: Long, dense, harsh coat, curly when clipped; any color
Common Ailments: slipped stifle, PRA, runny eyes, ear infections
The Toy Poodle was a favorite of the French Monarch Louis XVI and
developed in France.  This exposed it to nutrients that were very
different from the native nutrients fed to its German forefathers; the
Standard and Miniature Poodles.
When researching this breed's dietary requirements, I discovered some
interesting differences.  The molecular form of calcium found in beef
bone meal can cause the Toy Poodle dietary distress, but the molecular
form of calcium found in oyster shells is assimilated well by the Toy
Poodle.  Also the fat soluble Vitamins A and D should be from palmitate
or fish liver, and you should avoid vegetable sources such as beta
carotene.  You can judge a Toy Poodle's assimilation of these nutrients
by observing the condition of the animal's skin and mouth tissue (please
see chapter on A Home Health Check for Symptoms of Nutritional
Problems ).
Nutritionally, there are many differences per pound of body weight
between the Toy Poodle and its larger relatives.  The native foods of
Central France where the Toy Poodle developed were much higher in
carbohydrates than the foods of Northern Germany where their larger
relatives developed.  Therefore, I suggest a blend of horse meat with
flax, wheat, oats, beets, and corn for the Toy.  I also recommend that you
do not feed this breed any food containing rice, soy, or avocado.
POODLE (Toy)
166
Weight Standards: m - 42 to 60 lbs., f - 35 to 50 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 20 to 23 inches, f - 17 to 21 inches
Coat: profuse, in black, brown solid or combined with white
Common Ailments: liver & kidney disorders, skin rashes, hot spots
The Portuguese Water Dog developed on the water  off the coast of
Portugal.  They spent most of their life on the water as a working
member of the fishing crew on Portuguese vessels.  It was their job to
be a ship to ship or ship to shore courier, dive for lost tackle, or drive
schools of fish into the nets.  These duties required a very special breed
of dog.  They had to have the stamina to swim for hours and the
intelligence to be trained to do what most people would agree is very
unusual work for a dog!  Physically they are also very special when
compared to many land breeds.  They never shed their coat, their very
lean body can store large energy reserves, and they have webbed feet for
swimming. And yes, their special physical characteristics have also
given them special dietary needs.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been the same as any
crew member on board an 8th century Portuguese fishing vessel and
very different from a land animal's diet.  They would have subsisted on
a diet of fish blended with rice and nuts cooked in olive oil.  Fruits were
citrus fruits or dried figs.
For the Portuguese Water Dog is one of the breeds that needs to have a
food made for its unique requirements.  I do recommend that you feed
them their protein, vitamins and minerals from coastal or ocean sources
and avoid products like beets, potatoes, soy, beef, or horse meat.
PORTUGUESE WATER DOG
167
Weight Standards: m/f - 14 to 18 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 13 inches
Coat: Short, glossy coat, black or fawn
Common Ailments: eye lacerations, respiratory problems,
heat prostration
The Pug originated in the lowlands of Tibet, a very mountainous
environment.  The specific area the Pug can call home has an average
elevation of 16,000 feet.  This elevation affected the climate, natural
vegetation, and wildlife.  The Pug was no exception.  The only meat
sources available for the Pug to eat would have been native species of
rodent, goat, deer, boar, horse, or Yak.  Principal grain sources from this
area would have included barley, rye, and mountain corn.  Due to the
mountain climate of Tibet, meat sources have a high fat content and the
requirement of a high fat-to-protein ratio remains with this breed.
There are no commercial all-breed dog foods providing the food sources
upon which Pugs developed, and most food ingredients don't come
close to the amino acid profiles of the breed's original nutrient sources.
Yet this breed has demonstrated it can do well on a base diet that is high
in animal fats from beef and horse meat.   The protein content of the food
should be kept very low.  Any grains in the food should come from
barley, wheat and rice.  I also suggest that you avoid feeding a Pug any
foods containing lamb, poultry, ocean fish, avocado, or yellow corn.
PUG
168
Weight Standards: m/f - average 30 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 17 to 19 inches, f - 16 to 18 inches
Coat:  double, naturally corded long top coat, black, gray or white
Common Ailments: dysplasia, skin ailments, pigmentation
The Puli of today developed over the last 1000 years in Hungary.
Before that time they were the working companions of the Magyars of
Central Asia.  They are the most popular breed of dog in Hungary today
and have earned their popularity by being both hard workers and
pleasant companions.  They are very quick and agile, and the work that
they do best is the herding of cattle and sheep.
The region of Hungary that the Puli has lived in for the last 1000 years
is known as the food basket of Europe.  It grows many different crops
and provides large amounts of meat for the rest of the European
continent.  Native food supplies for this breed would have been very
diverse.  They would have included crops such as wheat, barley, rye,
flax, oats, sugar beet, potato, and greens.  Meats included beef, lamb,
poultry, and pork.  This exposure to such a wide range of food sources
has provided the Puli with an ability to use many commercial dog food
formulas today.
For the Puli I recommend foods that contains horse meat, beef, poultry,
barley, oats, wheat, and sugar beet. The food should have a high fiber
and protein content of about 24% to 26% but a very low fat content.  I
also feel that you should avoid feeding a Puli any soy products
(including coat conditioners), avocado, white rice, or citrus products.
PULI
169
Weight Standards: m - 75 lbs., f - 65 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 25 to 27 inches,  f - 24 to 26 inches
Coat: a short single and sleek coat, light to dark Wheaton in color
Common Ailments: dermoid sinus, hot spots, pigmentation
The Rhodesian Ridgeback developed prior to the 16th century in
Southern Africa.  As one of the native South African ridged dogs, they
were family pets and guard dogs.  They are extremely protective of small
children and protected the villagers' children from wild animals, including
the Lion.  Because they could hold a Lion at bay, big game hunters used
this breed for commercial reasons.  These hunters would have the dog
hold a Lion at bay in order for their clients to take the time to make a good
shot.  Cornelius van Rooyen, a big game hunter from Rhodesia, is
credited with making the breed known to the rest of the world.  This
breed is now named the Rhodesian Ridgeback because of where this one
man hunted and because of a ridge of hair on the dog's back, which runs
in the opposite direction to the rest of the coat.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been from the African
scrub.  These consisted of lion, elephant, gazelle, zebra, wilder-beast,
goat, poultry, rabbit, other small game animals, ground nuts (like a
peanut), brown rice, and wheat.
For the Rhodesian Ridgeback I recommend foods that are a blend of
horse meat, poultry, lamb, wheat, avocado, and brown rice for this
breed.  I also suggest that you avoid feeding any white rice, beef, white
potato, or soy (including any soy oil coat conditioners) to this breed.
RHODESIAN RIDGEBACK
170
Weight Standards: m - average 115 lbs., f - average 100 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 23 3/4 to 27 inches, f - 21 3/4 to 25 3/4 inches
Coat: Short, flat coat, black with mahogany
Common Ailments: hip dysplasia
The Rottweiler originated in Italy.  It was brought to Southern Germany
by Hannible as a guard dog and pack animal for his troops.  It completed
its development into the dog we know today in the township of Rotteil,
Germany, which is a small hamlet in the foothills of the German Alps.
It is from this small hamlet that this breed received its current name.
Nutritionally the Rottweiler is a breed that should be treated as a puppy
for 18 to 24 months, even though they usually reach their full adult size
in 10 to 12 months.  The Rottweiler's skeletal systems and muscle
structure are both slow to develop.  A 12-month-old dog may appear to
be fully grown, but it is still a puppy in terms of its nutritional needs.
When this breed is fed an adult dog food too early, there is a higher
chance for developing dysplasia or other bone and muscle problems.
When kept on the puppy formulas and schedules until they become
adults (nutritionally) they will have fewer problems later.
The nutrients of its native Italy included high carbohydrate grain
products.   The nutrients found in the mountains of Southern Germany
were lamb, poultry, goat, and cheeses.  Note: all of these nutrients are
high in their fat content.
I have found that the ideal base diet for the Rottweiler would consist of
a blend of lamb, poultry, dairy products, and wheat.  Foods for this breed
to avoid would include fish, horse meat, beef, corn, soy, or white rice.
ROTTWEILER
171
Weight Standards: m - around 165 lbs., f - around 145 lbs.
Height Standards: m - over 27 1/2 inches, f - over 25 1/2 inches
Coat: two varieties; short and long, in red and white with black
Common Ailments:  hip dysplasia, bloat, tumors, skin rashes
The Saint Bernard was originally from the foothills of the Alps and a
farmer's working companion.  They were taken from their native
environment to a Hospice in the Swiss Alps in 1660.  It was here they
performed the rescue work that made them famous.  Monks from the
Hospice du Grand St. Bernard  identified some special characteristics
in this breed that they felt made them very suitable to do rescue work in
the mountains around the Hospice.  These special characteristics were
stamina, both a heavy double coat and a heavy fat layer to provide
thermal protection from prolonged exposure in the snow, and an
extraordinary sense of smell and hearing.  Some of these same physical
characteristics determine their unique nutritional requirements.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been mutton, goat, dairy
products, wheat, and low ground vegetables.  The vegetables were the
type that could grow in the short growing season found in the foothills
of the Swiss Alps.
For the Saint Bernard of today I recommend foods of lamb with wheat
and potato.  However, I also feel that you should avoid feeding a
commercial food made with white rice, soy, yellow corn, avocado,
horse meat or beef to this breed.
SAINT BERNARD
172
Weight Standards: m/f - 50 to 60 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 23-28 inches
Coat: single, silky in texture, flat, in any color but solid black
Common Ailments: circulatory problems, skin rashes and hot spots
The Saluki developed in Ancient Mesopotamia prior to the invasion of
the Persian Empire by Alexander the Great (356-323 B.C.).  Moslems
inhabiting this area declared this breed sacred.  It was the only animal
allowed to sleep on the carpet of a Sheikh's tent.  As a favorite of the
sheiks, they were never sold but given as gifts.  Because of this they
became known as a breed of royalty.
Mesopotamia (today's Egypt) is a hot and humid area.  Therefore, unlike
many breeds that developed thermal layers of fat to protect them from
a cold environment, the Saluki is a breed with very little body fat.  This
physical characteristic is just one reason this breed has unique nutritional
requirements.
Foods found in their native environment would have included camel,
goat, rabbit, poultry, other small desert game animals, brown rice,
wheat, oils (olive), and citrus fruits.  Food supplies that developed this
breed were influenced by both the environment and the religious beliefs
of their Moslem owners.  The Moslem faith prohibits the consumption
of beef in any form.  Therefore, this breed would not have been exposed
to this type of meat.
For the Saluki I recommend foods that contain poultry, brown rice,
wheat, and avocado.  I also recommend that you avoid feeding any soy,
white rice, beef, or horse meat to this breed.
SALUKI
173
Weight Standards: m - 55 to 75 lbs., f - 40 to 55 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 21 to 23 1/2 inches, f  -19 to 21 inches
Coat: Full, long top coat, white, biscuit
Common Ailments: hip dysplasia
The Samoyed originated in the area of the world know by modern man
as Finland.  They are named after the Samoyedes, nomadic tribesmen
who domesticated and trained these dogs.  These dogs were taught to
guard and drive the tribe's reindeer and caribou herds in their Northern
Arctic circle homeland.  Samoyedes also used this breed as draft and
sled dogs and household companions.  As one of the larger breeds of the
Spitz family of dogs, they have changed little over the last 2000 years.
In fact this breed of dog has lain claim to being the most nearly akin to
the primitive dog.  I know of no other breed that disputes this claim.
Principal nutrients of their native area have also changed very little in
the past 2000 years.  These nutrients consist of reindeer, fish, whale, and
caribou meat with potatoes and fodder beets.  Any grain crops would
include a form of oats, wheat, and barley.
For the Samoyed I recommend foods that are a blend of horse meat,
poultry, and fish with wheat and potatoes.  To the food I suggest you add
about 1 teaspoon of Tuna fish for each adult feeding per day.  The tuna
should be the type canned in water.  DO NOT USE TUNA CANNED
IN SOY OIL!  I also recommend that you avoid feeding the Samoyed
any foods that contain avocado, lamb, soy, or yellow corn.
SAMOYED
174
Weight Standards: m/f - 18 lbs. or under
Height Standards: m/f - 12 to 23 inches
Coat: Short dense under coat, stand-out top coat, black in color
Common Ailments:  hot spots and skin rashes
The Schipperke developed in Flanders before the 12th century.  This
small lowland country became part of Belgium in 1830.  The Schipperke
was a barge dog and companion to the boatmen who worked the
channels of this lowland country for centuries.  The name Schipperke in
Flemish means "little boatman."  This breed also served as a ratter and
carriage dog in the towns along the channels.
A very active breed of dog, it burns calories at an exceptionally high rate
on a per pound basis when compared with many lethargic breeds.
Today's Schipperke is also one of the few breeds that lives an average
of 15 to 16 years of age.  Such longevity is a very rare occurrence within
the canine family today.  I attribute this longevity to this breed's efficient
utilization of food and to its high activity level, which keeps it in good
shape.
Native food supplies for this breed would have consisted of both ocean
and fresh water fish, dairy cattle, grains from the barges, beets, and other
low ground type vegetables.
For the Schipperke I recommend foods that contain an equal amount of
beef blended with fish.  The food also should contain wheat, oats yellow
corn, and beets.  I also feel you should avoid feeding a Schipperke any
soy, avocado, white rice, lamb, or citrus products.
SCHIPPERKE
175
Weight Standards: m - 85 to 110 lbs., f - 75 to 95 lbs.
Height Standards: m - over 30 inches, f - over 28 inches
Coat: short, harsh and ragged in various shades of gray
Common Ailments:  bloat and dysplasia
The Scottish Deerhound is a direct descendant of an Egyptian desert
sight hound.  It was brought to Scotland by Phoenician traders prior to
1000 B.C..  In the Northern Highlands of Scotland their human
companions used this breed to run down and kill the native species of
deer.  This species of deer can stand about six feet at the shoulder and
has an average weight of 250 lbs.  Therefore, this breed needed to be very
fleet and very strong to do the job required.  It has retained those breed
specific physical attributes to this day.  However, its waterproof and
shaggy coat may have developed during its time in the Northern
Highlands.
Native food supplies from the Scottish Highlands included the venison
from the Scottish deer, poultry, wheat, flax, corn, and potatoes.  Foods
from their Egyptian homeland would have included desert game animals,
brown rice, citrus fruits, lamb and poultry.
For the Scottish Deerhound I recommend foods that are very high in
carbohydrates.  These foods should use a blend of lamb, poultry,
potatoes, wheat and corn.  I also recommend that you should avoid
feeding a Scottish Deerhound any beef, horse meat, soy, white rice, or
beet pulp.
SCOTTISH DEERHOUND
176
Weight Standards: m - 19 to 22 lbs., f - 18 to 21 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - about 10 inches
Coat: double with long topcoat (on sides), wiry in texture,
black, wheaton or  shades of brindle
Common Ailments:  skin ailments, hot spots, Scottie cramp
The Scottish Terrier is the oldest pure highland terrier breed of dog.
Records show they have not changed since the 1500's.  They originally
hunted the fox living in rocky boroughs of the Scottish Highlands.  They
were named for both their area of development as well as their Terrier
heritage.  First introduced into the dog show world in the early 1800's,
they were shown as the "Hard - Haired Scotch Terrier".  They were
called this because of a rough and wiry topcoat.  This wiry topcoat seems
to be prevalent among all sizes of breeds that developed in the highlands
of Scotland.  This breed has a gait that is a peculiarity in itself, unlike any
other breed of dog from Scotland or anywhere else.  Many Scottie
breeders claim this gait is a true indicator of the breed's unique
personality.
Native food supplies for this breed would have included mutton,
poultry, and a form of dairy cattle now found in the Aberdeen Scotland
area only.  Predominant vegetable and grain crops were potatoes, corn,
and wheat.
For the Scottie I recommend foods that are high in their carbohydrates
and low in their protein percentages.  These foods should have a blend
of poultry, mutton, wheat, corn, and potatoes.  I also feel that you should
avoid feeding a Scottish Terrier any horse meat, soy products, beet pulp,
white rice, or avocado.
SCOTTISH TERRIER
177
Weight Standards: m/f - 23 to 24 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 10.5 inches
Coat: A hard long top coat in solid white
Common Ailments: spinal disc problems, skin rashes and hot spots
The Sealyham Terrier is a new breed of dog.  It developed on the
Sealyham Estates of Captain John Edwards in Great Britain during the
mid to late 1800's.  Captain Edwards developed this breed by blending
many other breeds of dog commonly found in the area of his Sealyham
Estate.  The breeds that are the forefathers of the Sealyham Terrier are
the Bull Terrier, Corgi, Dandie Dinmont Terrier, Flanders Basset, Fox
Terrier, Old English Terrier and West Highland Terrier.  Captain
Edward's goal was to develop a breed of terrier that was fearless and
tough, fast enough to work with Otter Hounds as a hunt terrier, and agile
enough to slip down a badger hole in pursuit of quarry.
To trace the native food supplies for this breed we would have to
consider all the breeds that went into the development of the Sealyham
Terrier.  However, this is very easy since they were all from the same
area and were thus exposed to the same basic dietary environment.  This
environment would have provided these breeds with meats from their
hunting, (the fox, otter, and badger), and with domesticated poultry and
mutton.  The vegetable crops were those that could grow in this area's
rocky soil, such as cabbage, potatoes, wheat, and yellow corn.
For the Sealyham Terrier I recommend foods that are a blend of horse
meat, mutton, poultry, corn, wheat, and potatoes.  However, I feel you
should avoid feeding this breed any white rice, soy, avocado, or ocean
fish.
SEALYHAM TERRIER
178
Weight Standards: m/f - average 18 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 13 to 16 inches
Coat: Long, straight, dense coat, Collie colors
Common Ailments: Collie Eye and epilepsy
The Shetland Sheepdog originated on the Shetland Islands off the
coast of Scotland.  The dog's job was to control small flocks of sheep and
to watch over toddlers at play.  To this day, Shelties display a strong
sense of boundary, a legacy from their earlier working days.  The
calcium source that the Sheltie best assimilates is also traced to its native
environment.  Breeders have found that calcium from animal bone
sources can cause kidney stones in this breed. Yet calcium from a coastal
ocean environment, like that found in oyster shells, is easily and
completely assimilated.  Also the unusual type of iodine contained in the
soil on the Shetland Islands is credited with altering the thyroxine
produced by the thyroid gland of the Sheltie's forefathers.  Since
thyroxine stimulates the pituitary gland and thus determines body size,
the environmental effect created the "Small Collie" or Sheltie of today.
Nutrients native to the Shetland Islands were all influenced by the
environment's unique mineral balance.  These included pork, goat,
lamb, fish, and vegetables, such as potato, carrots, and cabbage.
I recommend a blend of lamb, fish, potato, and barley for today's
Shetland Sheepdog.  Nutrients this breed should avoid are avocado,
beef, soy, yellow corn, or beet meal.
SHETLAND SHEEPDOG
179
Weight Standards: m/f - 45 to 55 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 14 to 16 inches
Coat: double, topcoat hard textured, a variety of colors; red-
peppered, black-peppered, solid black, black-brown, brindle or white
Common Ailments: pigmentation problems, skin rashes, hot spots
The Shiba Inu developed in Central Japan in the prefectures of Gifu,
Nagano, and Toyama.  This breed resembles a small Akita, which also
developed in the same region.  The Shiba Inu's name translates to "little
dog."  Therefore, it has been theorized that development of this breed
came about through selective breeding of Akitas.  However, I have
found no records confirming this theory; and for all we know, the Akita
could have developed from selective breeding of Shiba Inus.  In Japan
the Shiba Inu hunted small game, such as the squirrels, birds, and hare
that lived in the foothills.  Its quickness and legendary intelligence have
been great assets.
The native food supplies for this breed would have included meat from
the small game they hunted.  This meat was blended with rice, a tuber
type of root much like our sweet potato, green vegetables, and cabbage.
For the Shiba Inu I recommend foods that are a blend of poultry, lamb,
white fish, and rice.  I also recommend that you avoid feeding a Shiba
Inu any yellow corn, white potato, beet pulp, beef, horse meat, avocado,
or citrus product.
SHIBA INU
180
Weight Standards: m/f - 12 to 15 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 9 to 10 inches
Coat: Long, dense, slightly wavy coat, all colors
Common Ailments: eye, ear, and respiratory problems
The Shih Tzu, the "lion dog", originated in Tibet.  The forefathers of
today's Shih Tzu were presented as a tribute gift of state to the Chinese
emperor over 2000 years ago.  At that time the emperor resided in an area
now known as Peking.  The exports of this breed to the rest of the world
have come from this area of China.  Therefore most people have
forgotten its Tibetan origins and have given the people of Peking credit
for both naming and developing this breed.
Today's Shih Tzu requires a high animal and poultry fat diet at all stages
of its life cycle.  This is due to the original dietary sources for the Shih
Tzu (both Tibet and Peking, China) being high in their fat-to-protein
ratios.  The Shih Tzu does not store this fat but converts it into energy
within hours.  For this reason it is best to feed this breed small quantities
of foods with a high fat to protein ratio at frequent intervals daily.
In its development the Shih Tzu enjoyed a diet consisting of poultry,
pork, barley, rice, soy, and the castles' rodents.  A blend of these
nutrients would be best for the Shih Tzu today.  I recommend a blend of
poultry, soy, rice, and wheat.  Conversely, I believe the least desirable
blend for the Shih Tzu would consist of beef, yellow corn, or oats.
SHIH TZU
181
Weight Standards: m - 45 to 60 lbs., f - 35 to 50 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 21 to 23 1/2 inches, f - 20 to 22 inches
Coat: Short, dense coat, all colors
Common Ailments: hip dysplasia, PRA, cataracts
The Siberian Husky originated in the steppes area of Siberia.  This
breed gained international recognition in 1925 when a dog sled team
comprised of Sibes delivered diphtheria serum to Nome, Alaska, and an
epidemic was diverted.  This was done despite extremely adverse
weather conditions and after many other dog teams comprised of other
breeds had tried but failed.  A statue of the lead dog from that team, Balto
, now stands in Central Park, New York.
When compared to other breeds, the Siberian Husky's need for
carbohydrates per kilogram of body weight is very low.  Yet, the breed
has a high requirement for fatty acids.  The breed's fatty acids must come
from sources that contain the proper balance of linolenic, linoleic, and
oleic acids.  These three fatty acids must be balanced correctly for the
Siberian Husky to convert them to the arachidonic acid its body makes.
Also, the Siberian stands out nutritionally as the only breed of dog that
I know of that has never had a reported case of salmon poisoning.
The native diet of the Sibe consisted of salmon, fresh water fish, and
animals like otter and mink that are very high in their fat content.  For
this breed I recommend food based on a blend of fish and poultry. These
sources would provide the best sources of both fats and protein for a
Siberian Husky.  I also suggest you avoid dog foods based on beef, horse
meat, soy, avocado, yellow corn, or beet pulp.
SIBERIAN HUSKY
182
Weight Standards: m/f - 8 to 10 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 9 to 10 inches
Coat: Long, straight, silky coat, blue-and-tan
Common Ailments: Reportedly a hardy breed with few ailments
The Silky Terrier, a relatively new breed, originated in the township
of Sydney, Australia, in the late 1800's.  It developed as the result of a
cross breeding program between the Australian Terrier and the Yorkshire
Terrier. The Silky was developed for the sole purpose of being an
attractive household pet.  This breed is very easy going for a Terrier and
thrives on a lot of companionship.
Reportedly, table scraps that contain salts or beef fats can cause this
breed nutritional problems.  Also the Silky Terrier has very high
requirements (based on Kilogram of body weight) for vitamins A, D,
and E, and for the minerals copper, iodine, selenium, and zinc. These
vitamins and minerals, however, must be in a specific balance for the
Silky Terrier to use them.
The nutrients found in the Silky Terrier's native environment of Australia
would have included the meats from mutton, fish, and domesticated
poultry.  Grains and vegetable crops included wheat, rice, potatoes, and
greens.
I recommend food sources of poultry, lamb, fish, wheat, and dairy
products as the ideal base diet for the Silky Terrier.  I feel the worst blend
for this breed would contain soy, yellow corn, horse meat, beef, or their
by-products.
SILKY TERRIER
183
Weight Standards: m/f - average 28 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 10 inches, f - 9.5 inches
Coat: long and straight top coat, any color from cream to black
Common Ailments: kidney & liver failure, hot spots & skin rashes
The Skye Terrier developed on the island of Skye off the Northwestern
Coast of Scotland.  The records on this breed are complete and show that
this breed has not changed at all in the last four centuries.  It was kept
isolated on the island of Skye and was not common to the whole of
Scotland until the turn of this century.  It then became a favorite of
Queen Victoria and her patronage brought this breed popularity across
Britain.  Some unique physical characteristics of the Skye have also
given it unique nutritional requirements.  It is a very lean and muscular
dog.  It has a body weight to height ratio of about 3 lbs. per inch and its
body length to height ratio is 2 to 1.  This long and lean body not only
gives it a unique appearance, but also a longer colon and a different
muscle to body fat ratio than other breeds sharing same height or weight.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been land meats and
ocean fish that were very high in fatty acid content.  The meats would
have been from the otter, badger, and weasel they hunted as well as
ocean fish, poultry, pork, and mutton.
For the Skye Terrier I recommend foods that blend ocean white fish with
horse meat, poultry, wheat, corn, and potatoes.  They need to be very
high in fatty acid content and you may need to combine two foods to
achieve a proper blend.  I also recommend you avoid feeding this breed
any beef, avocado, citrus product, soy, or beet pulp.
SKYE TERRIER
184
Weight Standards: m/f - 45 to 55 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 26 to 28 inches, f - 22 to 28 inches
Coat: single, smooth textured, in solid shades of sand or fawn
Common Ailments: bloat, PRA, circulatory problems
The Sloughi developed in the deserts of Ethiopia over 5000 years ago.
They hunted Gazelles and desert rabbit for the nomadic tribesmen of the
area.  Then during the Middle Ages, when their Arab owners were
invading Central Africa, this breed accompanied them to the area
bordering the Sahara  and Tripolitania .  It is in this area where the
largest numbers of this breed can be found today.
This breed has very little body fat.  Its muscular frame is built for speed
and it has a coat designed for living in a warm dry climate.  I mention
these physical characteristics because they are some reasons why the
Sloughi must be fed a different type of food than a breed a heavy layer
of body fat and a double thick insulating coat to protect its body from the
cold.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been meat from the
desert rabbit, gazelle, camel, goat, and sage hen.  The vegetable crops
would have been of a tuber type or low ground variety and the primary
grains were rice and wheat.
For the Sloughi I recommend foods that are a blend of horse meat,
poultry, brown rice, avocado, and wheat.  However, I feel you should
avoid feeding a Sloughi any soy, beet pulp, white rice, white potatoes,
or beef.
SLOUGHI
185
Weight Standards: m/f - average 35 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 18 inches
Coat: long top coat, wavy & silky textured, solid wheaten in color
Common Ailments: liver failure, hot spots
The Soft-Coated Wheaten Terrier developed in Ireland prior to the
18th century.  There is very little written about this breed prior to 200
years ago.  Yet it is generally accepted that this breed existed in Ireland
before the Kerry Blue (another Terrier of Irish origins).  The Soft-
Coated Wheaten Terrier's coat is its trademark and its namesake.  The
coat is both soft and wheaten in color.  Even the pups born with a darker
coat will change to this unique color of gold as they mature.  This change
in color can be used as a guideline for changing the food from a puppy
formula to an adult maintenance formula.  I mention this time of change
since this breed is much slower to mature than many other breeds of the
same body weight.  To remove them from puppy formulas too early can
harm them later.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been the same ones that
come to mind when you think of Irish stew:  a blend of lamb, carrots,
barley, potato, and a slice of rye on the side.  The other meats that they
were exposed to were rodents and a very lean form of beef.
For the Soft-Coated Wheaten Terrier I recommend foods that use lamb,
barley, rye, and potato.  However, I feel you should avoid feeding any
foods containing white rice, soy, or yellow corn to this breed.  Also avoid
any soy oil based coat conditioners.  The oil based coat conditioners that
are best for this breed have a base of linseed or wheat germ oils.
SOFT-COATED WHEATEN TERRIER
186
Weight Standards: m - 28 to 38 lbs., f - 24 to 34 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 14 to 16 inches
Coat: short and smooth, in all colors except black and tan or liver
Common Ailments: circulatory & respiratory problems, skin rashes
The Staffordshire Bull Terrier developed in England.  It was named
for the area were it was most popular.  It is the oldest of all the Bull and
Terrier breeds, including the American Staffordshire or Pit Bull and the
English Bull Terrier. Yet ironically, this breed was the last of the Bull
and Terrier breeds to be registered by either the Kennel Club of England
or the American Kennel Club.
This dog developed from cross breeding dogs used in the blood sports
of bull baiting and bear baiting.  Today it retains the physical traits
required to excel in the ring.  However, the psychological mind set for
being a champion in the blood sport ring was never a "trait of the breed"
and each dog had to be trained in this skill.  Without cruel blood sport
training, this breed demonstrates a quiet trustworthy stable personality.
Their gentleness with children, the elderly, and friends is legendary.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been those of the English
country and consisted of beef, wheat, corn, potatoes, carrots, and
cabbage.
For the Staffordshire Bull Terrier I recommend foods that are a blend of
beef, wheat, corn, potatoes, carrots, and cabbage.  However, I also feel
you should avoid feeding this breed any rice (white or brown), soy, or
avocado.
STAFFORDSHIRE BULL TERRIER
187
Weight Standards: m - 40 to 50 lbs., f - 30 to 40 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 18.5 to 19.5 inches, f - 17.5 to 18.5 inches
Coat: Hard & wiry topcoat, solid black or salt & pepper coloring
Common Ailments: dysplasia and tumors
The Standard Schnauzer developed prior to the 15th century in
Germany.  It is the oldest of all the Schnauzer dog family.  Both the
miniature and giant Schnauzer are its direct descendants.  The breed was
known in its native Germany as the "Wirehaired Pinscher Breed" until
the late 1800's.  They then became known as the Schnauzer when a dog
of that name won top honors at an exhibition.  This dog's name
"Schnauzer" referred to a physical characteristic shared by all members
of this breed; their whiskered snout.  This breed has other physical
characteristics that make it unique in the canine world.  They possess
characteristics like their sinewy and compact body or their seemingly
unlimited reserves of energy.  Like this breed's unique temperament and
physical characteristics, they have specific nutritional needs.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been the same as those
we associate with a heavy German meal today.  The menu would consist
of beef or pork, potatoes, carrots, and cabbage with rye bread on the side.
For the Standard Schnauzer I recommend foods that use beef, rye wheat,
and potatoes.  I also recommend that you avoid feeding any commercial
food containing soy products, white rice, or avocado to this breed.
STANDARD SCHNAUZER
188
Weight Standards: m/f - 35 to 45 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 15 inches
Coat: long and very thick, slightly wavy, golden - liver in color
Common Ailments: kidney and liver failure, hot spots
The Sussex Spaniel, as with most of the Spaniels, can trace its history
back to Spain.  Like most of the Spaniels that were taken from the
continent to Britain, a lasting effect was made on this breed by the dog
fanciers of their new homeland.  An English dog fancier, Mr. Fuller,
developed a line that had a very unique coat coloring.  The coloring that
Mr. Fuller's breeding program produced was a golden - liver.  This is
now considered to be one of the distinguishing features of a pure bred
Sussex Spaniel today.  This coat is also very thick in its texture as well
as abundant in quantity.  This coat gives the Sussex Spaniel a requirement
for higher amounts of the amino acids Valine, Isoleucine, and Leucine
than other breeds that have a thinner or single coat.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been poultry, such as
woodcock and chukker (which have amino acid profiles high in Valine,
Isoleucine and Leucine) blended with grains of corn, flax, and wheat.
Vegetables included the potato, carrot, and beet.
For the Sussex Spaniel I recommend foods that contain poultry and a
small amount of beef blended with potato, yellow corn, and wheat.
However, I also feel you should avoid feeding a Sussex Spaniel any
white rice, soy (which is very low in the amino acids Valine, Isoleucine
and Leucine), or ocean fish.
SUSSEX SPANIEL
189
Weight Standards: m/f - 20 to 40 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f average 13 inches
Coat: double, thick, in gray or red sable coloring
Common Ailments: hot spots, skin rashes, kidney & liver problems
The Swedish Valhund (Vastogotpet ) developed in the areas bordering
the fiords in the cold and rugged land of Sweden.  They are a member
of the Spitz dog family.  They were also the companions of the Viking
tribes that inhabited this rugged country as far back as the 9th century.
The Swedish Valhund (Vastogotpet) stands only 13 inches high but can
weigh 40 pounds.  When compared to the world wide "average 40 pound
dog" that stands 19 inches in height, one can see many physical
characteristics that give this breed different nutritional requirements
than other breeds.  Their long body gives them a longer colon than 40
pound breeds with shorter body lengths.  Their heavy layer of body fat
gives them different requirements than 40 pound breeds that are leaner.
Their thick double coat requires different amounts of amino acids,
vitamins, and minerals than 40 pound breeds with a thin single coat.
Native meat supplies for this breed would have been North Atlantic fish,
reindeer, and bear (all high in body fats).  Vegetables were of the tuber
type with a grain that could grow in a short growing season.
For this breed I recommend foods high in fat and low in protein from
food sources like fish and horse meat blended with wheat, beet pulp, and
potato.  However, I suggest you avoid feeding a food that contains soy,
white rice, or citrus products of any kind to this breed.
SWEDISH VALHUND
190
Weight Standards: m/f - over 175 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - over 27.5 inches
Coat: thick, double, medium length, black or black with tan or gold
Common Ailments: dysplasia, hot spots, pigmentation problems
The Tibetan Mastiff developed in the foothills of Tibet, China.  These
foothills have an average elevation of 16,000 feet above sea level.  This
high elevation environment gave the breed its thick coat and a layer of
body fat not found in the Mastiff breeds of the lower elevations and
warmer climates.  The high elevation environment also affected this
Mastiff's nutritional requirements, making them as different from their
English or Neapolitan relatives as their respective coats and coloring.
The first written records pertaining to this breed appeared in Chinese
literature around 1121 B.C.  Later, when Marco Polo was in the far east
he referred to this breed in his reports.  These two early accounts provide
evidence that todays Tibetan Mastiff has changed very little over the last
3000 years.
Native food supplies for this breed would have included meats of the
horse, mountain goat, yak, llama, and oxen.  The grains and vegetables
are those that can grow in a very short season in rocky soil, like barley
and rice or a tuber root that can be compared to our sweet potato.  The
Tibetan Mastiff has a dietary requirement for foods high in animal fat.
They will not do well on the vegetable fats I recommend for its
Neapolitan relatives.
For the Tibetan Mastiff I recommend foods that contain horse meat,
barley, white rice, and beet pulp.  I also recommend you avoid feeding
this breed any potatoes, citrus products, avocado, or ocean fish.
TIBETAN MASTIFF
191
Weight Standards: m/f - 9 to 15 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 10 inches
Coat: double, silky textured, top coat is long & lays flat, all colors
Common Ailments: kidney stones, liver failure
The Tibetan Spaniel developed in Tibet before the Shang Dynasty in
1100 B. C..  The records show that they have been bred pure in this part
of the world since that time.  In the canine kingdom this breed can claim
to be one of the oldest pure bred dogs in the world.  It is one of the few
breeds with the Spaniel  nomenclature lacking any lineage to Spanish
origins.  In the Middle Ages French literature described a dog called an
Epagneul  as comforter and companion to ladies of the Oriental courts.
Somehow this Epagneul  became the modern Spaniel  part of this breed's
name.  An indoor dog, this is the only breed from Tibet that has a "hare
foot" (the two center toes being long).  All the other Tibetan breeds have
the more compact "cat foot" shape, better suited for walking in the snow.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been from an environment
with an average elevation of 16,000 feet above sea level.  The
domesticated meat animals are Yak, Llama, and Oxen.  The grains and
vegetables are those that can grow in a very short season in rocky soil,
like barley or a tuber root that can be compared to our sweet potato.
For the Tibetan Spaniel I recommend foods that contain horse meat,
barley, white rice, and beet pulp.  I also recommend you avoid feeding
a Tibetan Spaniel any carbohydrates from white potatoes, any citrus
products, avocado, or any ocean fish.
TIBETAN SPANIEL
192
Weight Standards: m/f - 22 to 23 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - 14 to 16 inches
Coat: double, long top coat; both top and undercoat are fine
textured and profuse, all colors except chocolate are acceptable
Common Ailments:  eye problems, hot spots
The Tibetan Terrier originated in the Lost Valley of Tibet.  It was
considered a good luck dog and was often given as a gift to a traveler who
successfully made the hazardous journey into this remote Tibetan
valley.  They were never sold since this could tempt fate.  Their
homeland valley is high in the Himalayan Mountains and the floor of
this valley has an elevation of 10,000 feet above sea level.  This
environment gave the Tibetan Terrier both unique nutritional
requirements and some unique physical characteristics.  A British dog
fancier, Dr. Greig, brought some to Britain after he came across this
unique breed of dog in India.  In Britain they were called a Terrier
because of their body size.  However, it should be noted that the only
similarity they have to any other breed that bears the name Terrier is
their size.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been from an environment
where the meat animals are Yak, Llama, and Oxen.  The grains and
vegetables are those that can grow in a very short season in rocky soil
like barley or a tuber root that can be compared to our sweet potato.
For the Tibetan Terrier I recommend foods that have a base from horse
meat, barley, white rice, and beet pulp.  I also recommend you avoid
feeding a Tibetan Terrier any potato, citrus product, avocado, or ocean
fish.
TIBETAN TERRIER
193
Weight Standards: m/f - average 50 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 22 to 24 inches, f - 21 to 23 inches
Coat: short but very dense, fine textured, in a golden rust color only
Common Ailments: dysplasia, skin rashes and hot spots
The Vizsla developed in the Great Plains area of Hungary on the border
of Rumania.  This breed of dog hunted both upland game and waterfowl
since it was first bred pure in its native land.  The breed suffered great
losses between the two world wars of 1914 and 1939, and by the end of
WW II in Hungary (1941) the breed was almost extinct.  Saved by local
dog fanciers, it is now back as one of the most popular breeds in Hungary
and is honored as their national dog.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been from an area of
continental Europe long known as the food basket of the continent.  Over
90 % of the land in the Great Plain of Hungary is under cultivation with
60% of that land being set aside for grain production.  The crops of
wheat, barley, rye, and oats are the principal grains produced.  The most
prevalent meats are from cattle, pigs, sheep, and poultry.
For the Vizsla I recommend food that is a blend of poultry, wheat,
barley, and rye mixed with a second food that is a blend of horse meat
and oats. This will give the Vizsla the high fiber and balance of protein
it requires.  However, you should avoid feeding them any food that
contains soy bean products of any kind (including soy oil coat
conditioners), white rice, avocado or beet pulp.
VIZSLA
194
Weight Standards: m - 70 to 85 lbs., f - 55 to 70 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 25 to 27 inches, f - 23 to 25 inches
Coat: short sleek and gray in color
Common Ailments: bloat and dysplasia
The Weimaraner developed in Germany during the late 1700's and
early 1800's in the Weimar Court, a township in the foothills of the
German Alps close to Bavaria.  Originally called the Weimar Pointer in
their native land, they hunted the wolves, wildcats, mountain lions, and
bear from the surrounding mountains.  After these animals of prey
became rare or extinct in the Weimaraner's native area, the breed then
hunted the smaller fur bearing game and upland game birds of the area.
They excelled as a bird dog because of their very soft mouth and were
well established as a retriever for both upland birds and waterfowl when
they first entered this country.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been from the Weimar
Township area of Germany.  The soil here is not noted for its fertility and
has a unique mineral content.  I associate this soil's unique mineral
content with this breed's unique mineral requirements.  Food crops of
the area include the potato, cabbage, alfalfa, and barley with meats like
pork, poultry, beef, goat, and deer.
For the Weimaraner I recommend foods that are high in animal fat from
lamb and poultry.  The overall food blend should be poultry first, lamb
second, potato third and then a blend of grains like wheat and barley.  I
feel you should avoid feeding a Weimaraner any ocean fish, beet pulp,
white rice, or soy.
WEIMARANER
195
Weight Standards: m/f - average 40 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 17 inches
Coat: flat, silky textured with mild feathering, red & white in color
Common Ailments: epilepsy, hot spots and skin rashes
The Welsh Springer Spaniel developed in Wales, which is located on
a peninsula of Great Britain.  This breed is a direct descendant of the red
and white dogs that the Gauls  brought to Wales in pre-Roman times.  In
Wales they were isolated from the rest of the world and bred pure for
centuries.  Wales has been described as a highland country of old hard
rocks.  Yet this country, which is only 150 miles long, has three very
distinct climates.  The Welsh Springer Spaniel comes from the higher
elevations of Wales (2700 to 3500 ft.) in the Brecknock area.  This
specific area of Wales has a great deal of temperature flux.  It was this
environment that gave this breed a weather resistant coat that is "self
cleaning".  It was also this environment that gave this breed its unique
nutritional requirements.
Only a limited variety of crops (rye, barley, wheat, and potato) could
grow in the rocky soil of this breed's native environment.  Any meats of
the area were from the small herds of cattle or sheep and domesticated
poultry, or wild fowl.
For the Welsh Springer Spaniel I recommend  foods that blend poultry,
mutton, and beef meats with corn, wheat, and potato.  However, I also
recommend that you avoid feeding any ocean fish, white rice, avocado,
or soy bean product to this breed.
WELSH SPRINGER SPANIEL
196
Weight Standards: m/f - average 20 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - average 15 inches
Coat: short and wiry in texture, black & tan or grizzle & tan in color
Common Ailments: skin rashes, liver failure, kidney problems
The Welsh Terrier, a true Terrier  in every sense, is a direct descendant
of the old English Black and Tan Terrier.  It was first discovered in the
early 18th century in the country of Wales.  This breed of Terrier
developed along the Welsh coast to hunt the otter, fox, and badger that
inhabited the rookeries of this north Atlantic land.  They are very similar
in appearance to the Airedale Terrier, from Yorkshire County England,
except for their body size.  This similarity has led to the speculation that
this breed and the Airedale may be related.  However, there are records
dating from 1737 that show the Welsh Terrier to be bred out of the old
English Black and Tan and bred pure since then.  If there is a relationship
between the Airedale Terrier and the Welsh Terrier, it is far enough
removed so that we can identify each one for the individual that it is.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been from the coast of
Wales and included the otter, badger, fox, fish, poultry, mutton, cabbage,
and potato.  These foods are the dietary staples for both the humans and
the dogs in this area.
For the Welsh Terrier I recommend foods that are a blend of fish,
mutton, poultry, corn wheat, and potatoes.  I also recommend you avoid
feeding any horse meat, avocado, citrus fruit, or white rice to this breed.
WELSH TERRIER
197
Weight Standards: m/f - 15 to 18 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 11 inches, f - 10 inches
Coat: double, hard textured, straight and always white in color
Common Ailments: coat pigmentation, kidney and liver failure
The West Highland White Terrier comes from the Western Highlands
of Scotland and they are white in color.  This area is described as hard
rock formations bisected by valleys known as "glens" or "straths."  The
highlands are in the shadow of the Grampian Mountains.  Though this
land is not good for agricultural crops, it is inhabited by many crofts
(small farms), which raise sheep able to survive by grazing amongst the
rocks.  Also living amongst the rocks are many vermin, such as the fox,
rabbit, and rodents.  These vermin can ruin the limited crops grown in
this area.  Therefore, the farmers from this area developed a breed of dog
that would both help control the vermin population and save their crops.
This special breed is today's Westie.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been the crofts' mutton
and poultry stock, with potatoes and a limited amount of barley and rye.
The dogs also would have eaten the vermin they hunted.
For the West Highland White Terrier I recommend foods that provide
meat protein from poultry and lamb, the carbohydrates from potato,
barley, and wheat, and the fats from their poultry meat source.  I also
recommend you avoid feeding a commercial food that contains soy,
white rice, yellow corn, beef, or horse meat to this breed.
WEST HIGHLAND WHITE TERRIER
198
Weight Standards: m/f - average 25 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 19 to 22 inches, f - 18 to 21 inches
Coat: short and sleek, may be any color or color combination
Common Ailments:  monorchidism, hot spots and skin rash
The Whippet developed in Great Britain but originated in Italy or
Northern Africa.  Roman legions brought this breed to Great Britain
when they invaded in 49 A.D..  The Whippet is the breed example I use
when asked how long it would take a dog to change its nutritional
requirements when exposed to different foods.  My answer is that it
would take as long as it would for a dog's coat to adapt to a new climate.
After twenty-one centuries, the Whippet still has a coat best suited for
the warm and dry environment of its origins and not the heavier double
coat found on breeds originating in the colder climate of the British
Islands.  Likewise, they still retain the nutritional requirements they
developed in their native environment.  Fortunately for the Whippet the
rabbit was the main food supply in both their native area of the world and
in their new homeland.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been rabbits, domesticated
poultry, mutton, goat, and wheat or corn.
For the Whippet I recommend foods that are a blend of lamb, poultry,
wheat, and corn. The addition of a linseed oil coat conditioner to this
blend will provide this breed with a good balance of the fatty acids its
skin and coat require. However, you should avoid feeding a soy oil coat
conditioner to this breed as well as any soy bean meal in its food.  Other
food sources to avoid feeding a Whippet include horse meat, beef, or
ocean fish.
WHIPPET
199
Weight Standards: m - average 60 lbs., f - average 50 lbs.
Height Standards: m - 21.5 to 23.5 inches, f - 19.5 to 21.5 inches
Coat: double, short, wiry textured, chestnut or gray & chestnut mix
Common Ailments: dysplasia, liver and kidney problems, hot spots
The Wirehaired Pointing Griffon originated in Holland and then
developed further in France.  Holland, now known as The Kingdom of
the Netherlands, is a small European coastal country, north of France
and east of Germany.  Its highest elevation is 1000 feet and its lowest
elevation is 20 feet below sea level.  Holland's extremely fertile land and
extremely wet climate produced a breed of dog that has one of the most
unique coat fibers found in the canine family. This breed's coat, though
relatively short, insulates the dog's body better than many fine textured
long double coats found in the Nordic Spitz breeds.  Yet this coat
requires stripping and the texture is like that found in many terrier breeds
from other climates. This coat, found only on the Wirehaired Pointing
Griffon, is one way this breed is different from other breeds of canines.
The differences among this breed and others also extend to its nutritional
requirements.
Native food supplies found in their original coastal and lowland
environment would have been oats, potato, rye, sugar beets, and wheat.
Meats were from domesticated poultry, dairy cattle, and ocean fish of
the North Sea.
For the Wirehaired Pointing Griffon I recommend foods that contain
ocean fish, poultry, and dairy products blended with potato, oats, and
sugar beet.  I also recommend that you avoid feeding yellow corn,
avocado, soy bean meal, or horse meat to this breed.
WIREHAIRED POINTING GRIFFON
200
Weight Standards: m/f - Standard; average 50 lbs., Toy; average 30 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - Standard; 13 to 22 inches, Toy; under 13 inches
Coat: a hairless breed of dog, only a tuft of hair on head and tip of tail
Common Ailments: depigmentation, albinism, cryptorchidism, and
monorchidism
The Xoloitzcuintli (pronounced: show - low - eats - queen - tlee)
developed in Western Mexico.   Historians trace this breed of dog to the
Colima culture between 900 and 300 A.D.  The Colima people kept the
Xoloitzcuintli as a representative of their god Xolotl.  It had the duty of
guiding the souls of the dead to their unearthly destinations.  The Xolo
has many unique features when compared to other breeds of the canine
family.  They are hairless and their skin will sunburn.  They have an
abnormally high body temperature due to a metabolic rate different
from any other animal.  Another interesting feature is the absence of the
pre-molar teeth.  All of these unique physical features make this animal
a one of a kind breed of dog.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been from the western
mountains of Mexico, located near the equator.  This is a very hot and
humid area where the native meats (even the wild boar) are very low in
body fats and the crops consist of citrus fruits like the mango and papaya.
For the Xolo I cannot recommend any of the commercial food blends.
I do recommend that you study the nutrients of their immediate area
before you attempt to take one of these dogs home with you.  The
Mexican government has declared it illegal to take one out of Mexico.
Try to meet dietary needs by providing native nutrients to any "exported"
member of this breed.
XOLOITZCUINTLI
201
Weight Standards: m/f - under 7 lbs.
Height Standards: m/f - under 7.5 inches
Coat: double, silky long straight top coat, steel blue with tan
Common Ailments: slipped stifle, enclampsia
(common when whelping)
The Yorkshire Terrier developed near the township of Yorkshire,
England, on the British Islands.  Prior to their becoming house pets, they
were used as ratters in the coal mines and mills of the area.  During this
time the average Yorkshire Terrier weighed around 15 pounds, (about
twice the body weight of today's Yorkie).  Today's small Yorkie became
the most popular toy breed in England after they were selectively bred
down in size and made into fashionable house pets.  The Yorkshire
Terrier is one of the "slowest" of the toy breeds when it comes to the
development of its skeletal structure.  Thus it requires more of the
nutrients found in puppy formulas for a longer period of time than the
other toy breeds.  When first born, they are normally a solid black color
and do not become steel blue and tan in color until they reach about one
year of age.  This change in coat color can be used as a "gauge" for
changing the dog's puppy formula to adult dog food.
Native food supplies for this breed would have been rodents, a dairy
cattle form of beef, potato, sugar beet, rye, and barley.
For the Yorkshire Terrier I recommend foods that are a blend of horse
and beef meats, sugar beet, potato, wheat, and barley.  I also suggest you
avoid feeding a Yorkie any red fish, such as salmon, yellow corn, or soy.
YORKSHIRE TERRIER
Medical terms
Assimilation - Process of transforming food into a state suitable for
absorption by the circulation and conversion into body tissue;
synthetic or constructive metabolism; anabolism.
Bionutritive -  Affording nutrition.  The sum of the processes con-
cerned in the growth, maintenance, and repair of the living body as a
whole.  Biological nourishment provided by food.
Black Tongue - A disease due to a deficiency of niacin; similar to
pellagra.
Bloat - An abnormal accumulation of gas in the stomach or intes-
tines, resulting in distention of the abdomen.
Cataracts - Partial or complete opacity of the crystalline lens or its
capsule.
Collie eye - Congenital defects of the choroid or optic nerve impair-
ing vision.
Cyst - A comining form denoting likeness to or connection with a
bladder or cysto.  A membranous sac serving for the reception of
fluids or gases.
Dermoid Sinus - A draining cyst originating at or near base of spine.
Dysplasia - A gradually crippling abnormality of the hip joint.
Dwarfism - Abnormal development of the body; the condition of
being dwarfed.
Eczema - An acute or chronic, noncontagious, itching, inflammatory
disease of the skin.  The skin is reddened, the redness shading off
into the surrounding unaffected parts.
Enclampsia - An after-whelping disturbance in a bitch's calcium
metabolism characterized by nervousness and spasms.
Heart Failure - The syndrome resulting from failure of the heart as a
pump.  The mechanism is varied, the symptoms depending on
whether the left or right ventricle preponderantly fails.  Dyspnea is
most marked in left ventricular failure; and engorgement of organs
with venous blood, edema, and ascites, most marked in right ven-
tricular failure.
Hemophilia - A sex-linked, hereditary disease occurring only in
males but transmitted by females.  It is characterized by impaired
blood coagulation, attributed by some to a deficiency in the plasma
of effective thromboplastinogen.
Hot Spots - Inflammation of the epidermis with loss of coat.
Hyper Thyroid - An abnormal condition brought about by excessive
functional activity of the thyroid gland.
Hypo Thyroidism - A morbid condition due to deficiency of thyroid
hormone; in advanced form expressed as cretinism or myxedema.
In vivo - In the living organism: used in contrast to  in vitro:  In
glass; referring to a process or reaction carried out in a culture dish,
test tube, etc.
Kidney Failure - The syndrome resulting from failure of the kidney
as a productive gland.
Liver Failure - The syndrome resulting from failure of the liver as a
productive gland.
Monorchidism - Congenital absence of one testis.  Failure of one
testicle to descend into the scrotum.
Progressive Retinal Atrophy (PRA) - deterioration of the retina of
the eye.
Slipped Stifle - Dislocation of the kneecap.
Snow Nose - Inflammation of the epidermis in the nose region
affecting the senses of touch, pain and temperature.
Temperature Sensitive - Variations of body temperature through the
day.
Torsion - A twisting of the intestine following bloat.
Tumors - A swelling.  Specifically, a new growth of cells or tissues
characterized by autonomy, that is, independent of the laws of
growth of the host.  It is progressive and in malignant form limited
only by the nutrition provided by the host.
Von Willebrand's Disease - An inherited blood disease somewhat
like hemophilia.
Worms - A member of the phyla Annelida, Nemathelminthes, or
Platyhelminthes.  The medically important forms belong to the last
two phyla.
Each breed of dog has
physical or temeramental characteristics
that are different from any other breed.
The question is
NOT IF those characteristics affect
a breed's nutritional requirements
BUT HOW MUCH do they affect a
breed's nutritional requirements?
This is Mr. Cusick's second book.  His first book about the
different dog breeds and their very different nutritional
requirements was, CANINE NUTRITION AND CHOOSING
THE BEST FOOD FOR YOUR BREED OF DOG, published in
1990.
Mr. Cusick first became interested in the nutritional variations
between the different breeds of dogs in 1968.  At that time he
was the owner of a major West Coast vitamin manufacturing
company producing an all breed dog food supplement that Saint
Bernards thrived on but which caused nutritional distress when
fed to Dalmatians.
His curiousness about the reactions that these two breeds of
dogs had to the one food product led him on a twenty year search
to identify the nutritional morphologies for most members of
the species: canine.
After his research proved why a food “good for one breed can
be harmful to a different breed” Mr. Cusick felt compelled to
educate all dog owners about his discoveries.  This book is only
one way he is trying to get that message out.  He has also taken
his crusade on-line with an Internet web site titled “William D.
Cusick / The Animal Advocate.”  His web site can be found
through the various Internet search engines so that people can
contact him with any questions they may have about breed
specific nutrition and feeding their pets - CORRECTLY.
William
 D.
Cusick
& two friends
The Scientific Community Reviewed The Research
and stated:  “What emerges from the data developed by Cusick is a new way of
looking at the nutritional needs of sub-species.”
Dalton Scott, “Dogs and Nutrition,”
BIOLOGY DIGEST Volume 13, (Issue 9, May 1987) pp11-17
Then this book was reviewed by people like yourself
A Pet Owner: “The fact that dogs are genetically different is obvious. As Mr.
Cusick points out in this book, THEIR GENETIC DIFFERENCES   INCLUDE
THEIR NUTRITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.  When I go to the pet store to buy
food for my dogs, cats, birds and fish, they have food made for the different
types of birds and fish but not for dogs and cats.  Now I know why and what to
do about it.”
G. Moran
A Breeder:  “In 1985 I met Mr. Cusick.  Not being happy with the food I was
feeding at the time, I asked for and received the best advice I've ever had on
nutrition!  In Maltese, coat is very important and to get the coat you have to feed
the proper food.  I highly recommend this book to all breeders, veterinarians and
pet owners.”
Peggy L. Wanner / Kandu Maltese
A Dog Show Judge:  “For anyone having suffered through his dog displaying
many of the signs of improper feeding this book is a treasure chest.  Most of us
do not realize that dogs' nutritional needs are not like men's socks "one size fits
all."  It has only been in recent times that dog food companies have prepared
special formulas for age groupings.  Now William Cusick comes along and
knocks many of our pet theories, and perhaps those of the various dog food
companies into a cocked hat.  The book is interesting reading and zeroes in on
your breed.  I would advise you to read it thoroughly and ponder the significance
of the research done for this enlightening book.  It belongs in your library.”
Dr. Alvin Grossman
A Veterinarian:  “This book will make an excellent addition to the textbook
library at my clinic.  It has a wealth of information.  I  will  use  it  as  a
reference  source for  nutritional  and  medical  cases.  Any  person  serious
about  breeding  or  owning  dogs  will  want  this  book."
Richard Thoresen,  D. V. M.
